# Orphan Drug Prices and Epidemiology of Rare Diseases: A Cross-Sectional Study in Italy in the Years 2014-2019.

**PMID:** 35252257
**Journal:** Frontiers in medicine (2022)
**Authors:** Villa F, Di Filippo A, Pierantozzi A et al.
**PMC:** PMC8891228
**Search context:** pricing_market_access

## Full Text


### Introduction

In Europe, to receive an orphan designation by the European Medicines Agency (EMA), a drug must be intended for use in the treatment of a life-threatening or chronically debilitating disease with a EU prevalence being no more than 5 in 10,000 inhabitants (<250,000 patients, based on EU population of 514 millions) and for which there are no other alternatives or, eventually, the drug represents a significant benefit over the existing therapeutic options. Alternatively, regardless of disease prevalence, manufacturers need to show that the product market would unlikely generate sufficient revenues justifying investments required for its development (1).
The current European legislation requires orphan medicinal products to have access to the centralized marketing authorization procedure in order to ensure early market access [with accelerated assessment programs (2)], as well as several economic incentives to compensate for the potentially low profitability of a medicinal product intended for a limited population of patients (3).
With such a designation, manufacturers receive market exclusivity for 10 years (plus two more years if the orphan indication is extended to the pediatric population) in all EU countries and, in addition, financial incentives for research, development, scientific advice, marketing authorization application, inspections, post-authorization activities as well as market access in individual Member States.
In Italy, the EU orphan designation provides additional benefits during the national pricing and reimbursement (P&R) negotiation. Manufacturers can submit their dossier immediately (instead of 3 months later, as usual, when regulatory approval is ratified by the European Commission), after a positive Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) opinion, and be granted priority in the procedure for P&R decisions by the Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA).
In addition, orphan drugs are excluded from the refund in case of a breach of the statutory pharmaceutical expenditure ceiling. Once the negotiation process is complete (with a fast track procedure for the definition of P&R), the drug can have direct access to regional drug formularies (if present in the regional system) (3, 4). In addition, under specific circumstances, AIFA can also reimburse orphan drugs prior to their regulatory approval and, within a specific program for independent research, the Agency can fund non-profit research in the field of orphan drugs and rare diseases (4, 5).
In Italy for orphan drugs the same Health Technology Assessment HTA and P&R rules are applied as for non-orphan drugs (6). In 2020 in Italy 82% of orphan drugs authorized by EMA have been commercialized and reimbursed by the Italian National Health Service (INHS). The orphan drugs' spending, being 1.4 billion euro, has represented a 6.0% share of the total public pharmaceutical expenditure (4).
The implementation of the European legislation and the many incentives granted to orphan drugs manufacturers by individual Member States have greatly contributed to massive investments in the field of rare diseases and the successful development of several new compounds (7). Furthermore, following the orphan medicinal products Regulation implementation in EU (8) a rise in the number of scientific publications on rare diseases has been observed. Orphan drugs research activity in Europe has increased considerably compared to the past; during the first decade following the implementation of the Regulation the number of new biotech companies devoted to orphan medicinal products development across Europe has grown by 30% (9). In the period 2000–2020, over 2,382 orphan designations have been issued by the European Commission of which 190 have resulted in authorized medicinal products (10).
In Italy, the upward trend of clinical trials of patients with rare diseases continued significantly in 2018, representing 31.5% of the total (25.5% in 2017), of which almost 80% are for profit trials; there is still an increase in phase I trials on rare diseases (33.7%) and the percentage of trials with advanced therapy products in rare diseases is significant (11%, compared to a global increase in trials with advanced therapy products equal to 4.7%) (11).
By 2024, orphan drugs are expected to reach $242bn, capturing one-fifth of worldwide prescription sales, and orphan drug sales in the world are expected to grow at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (12) of 12.3% from 2019 to 2024, which is approximately double the rate foreseen for the non-orphan drugs market. Orphan drugs are forecasted to be 20.3% of worldwide prescription sales by 2024, with the majority being represented by oncological drugs and cell-and gene-based therapeutics (13).
Despite the benefits from a public health perspective, orphan drugs pose challenges and concerns in terms of sustainability. It has been observed that top 100 US orphan drugs has a mean cost per patient being almost 4.5 times greater than the non-orphan drug cost in 2018, although the difference has diminished in the 2014–2018 time period (13). Although developing a drug intended to treat a rare disease was not often considered profitable as for other medicinal products (14), the actual scenario shows different reality: median cost per patient differential is 5.5 times higher for orphan drugs compared to non-orphan (13).
However, it is well acknowledged that the price of orphan drugs is normally higher than that resulting from the value-based pricing, due to the small markets associated with rare diseases, which necessitate high prices to get returns on investments (15). The literature has found a significant variability on reimbursement and prices across EU countries (16, 17).
A correlation between therapy cost of orphan drugs and prevalence/incidence of the related rare disease can be hypothesized (18). However, these correlations have never been fully investigated.
Objective of this study is to assess if there is a correlation between: (a) the annual therapy cost of orphan drugs with the epidemiology (prevalence and incidence) of the relative rare diseases; (b) the epidemiology of the rare disease and the sales volume of orphan drugs; (c) the therapy cost and the sales volume of orphan drugs in the first year of marketing.

### Methods

This analysis included all EMA-approved orphan drugs whose P&R process for the first therapeutic indication was concluded in the period 2014–2019 with a positive decision on reimbursement in Italy. A longer time period was not considered since it was not possible to gather data through AIFA's electronic information system prior to 2014.
With regards to pricing, if the company (the Marketing Authorization Holder—MAH) presented different prices per unit (different price per pack), the highest one was chosen. We used the ex-factory public price published on the Italian Official Gazette (IOG) -that does not include confidential discounts and the effect of Managed Entry Agreements (MEAs). We also provided the same correlation analyses using the final reimbursed price (FP) which stems from confidential discounts and the estimated financial impact of MEAs (19). The Java program “Plot Digitizer” was used to estimate financial impact of financial-based and outcome-based MEAs.
To standardize the therapy cost of the medicines analyzed we considered the annual therapy cost, based on the dosing regimen reported in the Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC), including loading dose. If more than one dosage was possible, an average was taken. We considered the single administration for medicines with a one-shot administration (i.e., Nexobrid®).
As for correlation analysis with sales volumes, we excluded drugs whose sales data (at the time of the analysis) were absent (e.g., burosumab, panobinostat).
Prevalence and incidence data were collected according to the following hierarchical sources of information: (i) P&R dossiers submitted to AIFA by 
[...truncated]