# Debates over orphan drug pricing: a meta-narrative literature review.

**PMID:** 40055799
**Journal:** Orphanet journal of rare diseases (2025)
**Authors:** Hanchard MS
**PMC:** PMC11887186
**Search context:** pricing_market_access

## Full Text


### Introduction/Background

Rare diseases (RDs) affect 3.5-5.9% of the world population [1, 2] with prevalence rates rapidly rising [3, 4]. Their treatments, typically medicines with an orphan designation, are labelled orphan drugs (ODs) - and are increasingly expensive, placing strain on many healthcare systems. For instance, by 2010, eleven ODs held ‘annual sales totalling over $100 million [USD]. with 9% of [all ODs holding] blockbuster status (sales over $1 billion)’ [5]. Moreover the USA saw a 26-fold increase in orphan drug costs in 1998–2017 with ~ 12% annual increases since [6, 7]. Orphan drug revenues will likely constitute 20.3% of the world prescription pharmaceutical market by the end of 2024 [7], exceeding $1.1 trillion (USD) annual sales [8] - larger than the total gross domestic product (GDP) of many countries. In response, tensions have arisen in policy, academic, advocacy, and policy circles about the rising levels of rare disease (RD) prevalence, regulatory categories for ‘orphan’ designation, cost-valuation methods, and the broader implications for RD patients’ equitable access to treatment i.e., ODs. These often follow longer-standing debates over pharmaceutical pricing and regulatory approaches to underserved areas of medicine with unmet need, for example, past controversies over patients’ access to exceptionally high-priced HIV/AIDS drugs [5]. The latter remains pertinent with ‘newly launched prescription drugs [having] increased from a median of around $1400 a year (£1200; €1300) in 2008 to over $150,000 a year in 2021 [per patient]’ [9]. Amidst these long-standing tensions, questions remain unaddressed about the narratives circulating around OD pricing, their points of contestation/coalescence and evolution over time, the actors involved, and the bases underpinning their arguments.
This meta-narrative literature review identifies three narratives in literature surrounding orphan drug pricing. In one, commentators draw on critical normative health economics and notions of practical idealism to dispute industry calculation of OD development costs. They accuse pharmaceutical manufacturers of monopoly capitalism and incentive misuse to profiteer excessively. In a second narrative, industry-sympathetic health economists adopt either a utilitarian position steeped in positivism or lean towards notions of willingness-to-pay. They argue high OD prices signify a healthy functioning market, support longer-term innovation, and provide wider global equity of access. Many offer refined debate over OD costing calculations and approaches to valuation. A third narrative sees pharmaceutical/medical sociologists and normative economists propose alternative and novel approaches to appraisal, innovation, and valuation as way to work through the high OD price quandary. Synthesising these three narratives, the article below highlights growing consensus that incentives and policies around OD pricing are insufficient, with a sustained call for regulatory reform. It recommends that regulators look to alternative models of innovation steeped in social science thinking when reviewing appraisal, coverage, or reimbursement processes. Also, for increased patient inclusion and transparency to better encompass the full range of factors affecting RD patients’ ability to access high priced ODs.

### Method/Approach

This article presents a meta-narrative literature review (MNLR) on orphan drug pricing - a ‘semi-systematic approach [maintaining the] interpretive engagement, inductive reasoning, and cross-interrogation’ [10] of traditional/qualitative literature reviews. MNLRs identify the narratives, methods and epistemic traditions underpinning them, and storylines that connect them. They provide overview on ‘topics that have been differently conceptualised and studied by different groups of researchers’ [11]. They require reflexivity to ‘interpret, configure and arrange theories and concepts’ [12] into a meaningful argument, tracing ‘normal science’ in differing domains. They also rely on continual reflection to review findings [13], rather than forcing pre-existing schema onto literature or systematically quantifying articles.
The MNLR below discounts descriptions of valuation procedures, molecular compounds, or enactment of legislation/policy. It examines only literature engaging critically with orphan drug pricing. Following a wider project (see Funding Statement), this MNLR looks at the EU, UK, and USA only. It adopts RAMESES’ six MNLR ‘standards’ [11, 14]: (1) planning (2), searching (3), mapping (4), critical appraisal (5), synthesis, and (6) generation of recommendations. It also follows MNLR nomenclature, whereby: meta-narratives are [the] ‘unfolding “storylines” of research in a particular scientific tradition’ [14], each with one or more constituent narrative; Meanwhile, research traditions are ‘linked studies, each building on what has gone before and taking place within a coherent paradigm’ [12]; and each research tradition is underpinned by an epistemic tradition that grounds its claims in a particular way of knowing.
The planning, search strategy (Standards 1 and 2), and database choice were informed by three-years of ethnographic immersion in pharmaceutical debates - including eight pharmaceutical conferences, alongside various meetings, workshops, and talks, plus discussion with a subject-specific librarian, and traditional literature reviews for other publications. Clarivate’s Web of Science and Elsevier’s Scopus respectively found 1,567 and 4,828 unique items published between 1929 and 2022. A further 499 items appeared in both searches, totalling a raw set of 6,220 items after merging duplicate entries and removing erroneous ones, including two mis-indexed items dated 1929 and 1956– all other items dated 1977 or later (Fig. 1). See ‘Availability of data and materials’ below for a fully replicable open access search of reviewed literature items (including search terms).
Fig. 1Meta-narrative literature review process
Meta-narrative literature review process
Mapping the literature (Standard 3) involved categorising and winnowing it iteratively through five passes:
Pass 1 - reading titles, outlets (journal/publisher), and abstracts (where relevant) identified a broad set of categories, whilst discounting 215 items that were irrelevant/outside scope, i.e. covering topics with similar terminology orphan products in agriculture [15]. Also, 28 that were unlocatable, i.e. journal no longer available/insufficient detail to locate and 20 that could not be accessible, i.e. URL no longer resolved/no longer in print. A further 4,166 medical studies items that held OD pricing as peripheral concern only were discounted, i.e. case studies on molecular entity development and/or trials outcomes. The remaining 1,791 items comprise: 977 items covering policy debate about RDs and ODs, 626 on OD pricing and valuation - including policy around access to medicines for RDs including ODs spanning bioethics, human rights, and societal values. A smaller set of 49 items cover approaches to incentivising innovation in OD development, with 136 social science items examining the logic, processes, and patient experience of orphan drug pricing. Externally, this classification resonates with other reviews of health rationing literature [16]– a field with similar concerns– which located items in either health economics, bioethics, health policy, or sociology.
Pass 2 - re-reading abstracts and assessing journal/outlet scopes to identify research traditions, disciplinary backgrounds, approaches/methods, and narrative storylines found health policy and health economics prominent, with just 678 items to focus explicitly and critically on OD pricing debates.
Pass 3 - excluded a further 339 items covering healthcare systems outside geographical scope, leaving 338 items to review.
Pass 4 - re-reading abstracts, article introduction and discussion/conclusion sections, and/or full 
[...truncated]