# Promising therapeutic targets for ischemic stroke identified from plasma and cerebrospinal fluid proteomes: a multicenter Mendelian randomization study.

**PMID:** 38016292
**Journal:** International journal of surgery (London, England) (2024)
**Authors:** Zou X, Wang L, Wang S et al.
**PMC:** PMC10871597
**Search context:** genetic_target_validation

## Full Text


### Introduction

Highlights
Our study explored the causal relationship between 734 plasma proteins and 154 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins and ischemic stroke (IS) by Mendelian randomization study.
This study found a causal relationship between the plasma protein matrix metalloproteinase 12, switch-associated protein 70, and the CSF protein prekallikrein and IS risk, which is beneficial for the early prevention and treatment of IS.
No reverse causal relationship was found between 734 plasma proteins and 154 CSF proteins and IS.
Matrix metalloproteinase 12 and prekallikrein were associated with the target protein of the current treatment of IS and may be a potential target for new IS drugs.
Lanadelumab, a new drug whose target protein is a prekallikrein, may be a promising new drug for the treatment of IS.
The latest data on the global burden of disease shows that stroke is the second leading cause of death after ischemic heart disease and the third leading cause of disability after ischemic heart disease and neonatal disease. Ischemic stroke (IS) is the major subtype of stroke, accounting for 62.4% of new strokes, and is the leading cause of high mortality and disability in stroke. Early pharmacological treatment is the main medical intervention to effectively reduce the high mortality and disability rates of IS1. The only thrombolytic drug currently approved by the FDA is recombinant tissue fibrinogen activator2. However, the time window is narrow for treating IS, with the complication of hemorrhagic transformation, and less than 10% of stroke patients are currently eligible for this treatment3,4. There are still many IS patients without timely treatment available and evolve into patients with severe IS, with no reversal of the fatal or disabling fate. This may be the one of the main reasons why the disease burden of IS is rising each year, with a disability-adjusted life year of 143 (95% CI: 133–153 million) million in 20195. Therefore, it is urgent to address the unmet medical needs for the prevention and treatment of IS.
Clinical drugs can bind to target proteins in the body and alter the activity of the target or downstream proteins to stop the progression of the disease. Previous observations have identified plasma protein targets as potential therapeutic targets in IS6,7. However, the high cost and attrition rates of drug development make drug targeting of protein targets in preclinical trial studies IS highly practical. The proportion of drug mechanism-of-action supported by direct genetic evidence increases significantly across drug development trials, and the selection of genetically supported targets can double the success rate of clinical drug development8.
Mendelian randomization (MR) is an epidemiological approach that can correlate plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein information obtained by high-throughput sequencing with genome-wide association results associated with disease phenotypes. It can be applied for drug target identification and drug repurposing prior to clinical trials. MR assesses the causal relationship between exposure factors (such as proteomics) and outcome (IS) in a genetic context and excludes the influence of confounding factors on causality with the aid of multiple sensitivity analyses9, and the exclusion of potential confounding factors is one of its advantages over traditional observational studies10. Another advantage of MR is the ability to mimic the randomized controlled trial in grouping subjects according to the presence or absence of alleles and to observe the effect of alleles on outcome without the enormous human and material resources of a randomized controlled trial11. Although 653 plasma proteins have been used to identify drug targets of IS and its subtypes12 and 308 plasma proteins were used to explore the association of plasma proteins with stroke and its risk factors13, no drug target studies have been conducted using CSF proteins for medical intervention of IS and no potential drugs have been discovered. Therefore, we explored potential drug targets for IS in this study and purposes to build a theoretical foundation for the discovery and development of effective therapeutics to address the unmet medical needs of life-threating IS.

### Methods


### Research design

The purpose of this study is to build a groundwork for the later precise prevention and treatment of IS by identifying possible therapeutic targets of IS in the CSF and plasma proteins, as seen in Figure 1. An MR analysis was first conducted to examine the proteins in plasma and CSF that are linked to IS. Data were taken from published plasma and CSF proteomics studies, while IS data were collected from the MEGASTROKE collaboration. Sensitivity analysis using Bayesian colocalization, bidirectional MR, and phenotype scanning were then used to demonstrate that the results were robust. The results were then verified by a multicenter MR study, such as exposure data from Fenland and deCODE database and outcome data from FinnGen cohort, ISGC consortium and UK biobank (Supplemental Figure 1, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JS9/B402). Finally, a comparative and interactive analysis was performed to identify pharmacological targets for IS. There was no need to get informed consent or ethical approval for this study again because all of the data were taken from published sources, and the informed consent and approval were received.
Design of the study and its primary findings. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ISGC, International Stroke Genetics Consortium; PPI, Protein-Protein Interaction Networks.

### Exposure data acquisition

In the initial phase, the plasma proteins are acquired from a latest publication in Nature Genetics14, which integrates plasma protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) data obtained from five previously published GWAS studies15–18. Three thousand six hundred six pQTLs connected to 2656 proteins were present in this investigation. The CSF pQTL data was acquired from a study published in Nature Neuroscience19, which included a total of 274 pQTLs of 184 CSF proteins. Our requirements for pQTLs found in plasma and CSF were as follows: firstly, they had to be cis-acting pQTLs. Secondly, they had to have a current genome-wide association (P<5×10-8), and thirdly, they had to be found outside the major histocompatibility complex region (Chr6, 26–34 Mb). The effect of linkage disequilibrium (LD) was also eliminated (LD clumping r2<0.001). Finally, we included 738 cis-pQTLs in 734 plasma proteins (Supplemental Table 1, Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/JS9/B403) and 154 cis-pQTLs linked to 151 CSF proteins (Supplemental Table 2, Supplemental Digital Content 3, http://links.lww.com/JS9/B404) as exposure (‘Primary_’, center 1).
For the replication phase, we extracted plasma protein data from two other center studies using the original CSF protein data as validation. The plasma protein pQTL is from a proteomics study conducted by Ferkingstad et al.20 (deCODE database, center 2) in the journal of Nature Genetics. This research enumerated the 4907 plasma protein in 35 559 Icelanders’ and discovered 18 084 correlations between sequence variations and plasma protein levels20. The plasma protein data were obtained from a publication in Science that included 4775 proteins (Fenland database, center 3) measured in 10 708 participants21. To fill up any gaps in the QTL GWAS summary statistics, such as impact allele frequency, we used the matching human genome construct as a reference.

### Sources of outcome data

Data on IS for this study were obtained from a GWAS meta-analysis conducted by the MEGASTROKE consortium (‘_Primary’, center 4), which included 440 328 participants (34 217 cases and 406 111 controls) and analyzed 7 537 579 SNPs22. The investigations by the ISGC consortium23, which comprised 10 307 cases and 19 326 controls (center 5), and the FinnGen cohort24, which included 12 632 ca
[...truncated]