# Overcoming Clinical Resistance to EZH2 Inhibition Using Rational Epigenetic Combination Therapy.

**PMID:** 38315003
**Journal:** Cancer discovery (2024)
**Authors:** Kazansky Y, Cameron D, Mueller HS et al.
**PMC:** PMC11147720
**Search context:** convergent_evidence_moa

## Full Text


### Introduction

Unlike conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy, epigenetic therapy offers the ability to target cancer-specific dependencies with increased specificity and reduced toxicity. This is especially true for cancers caused by genetic mutations of transcriptional regulators, such as the chromatin remodeling BAF/SWI/SNF (Brg/Brahma-associated factors) complex that is mutated in more than 20% of human cancers (1). For example, malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRT) and epithelioid sarcomas (ES) are lethal tumors of children and young adults caused by inactivating mutations of SMARCB1/SNF5/INI1/BAF47, one of the core BAF/SWI/SNF complex subunits (2–4). Loss of normal BAF function can confer a dependency on the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and its methyltransferase EZH2. This dependency is thought to result from epigenetic antagonism between the two complexes, in which normal BAF activity evicts PRC2 from tumor suppressor loci (5, 6).
High EZH2 expression in many cancer types and gain-of-function EZH2 mutations in lymphomas (7–10) have led to the development of multiple inhibitors of EZH2 (11–13), several of which have now entered clinical trials (14). This includes clinical trials for SMARCB1-deficient tumors without EZH2 mutations (15). However, despite the potential of such targeted epigenetic therapies, the principles governing their effective application remain unknown. Intrinsic and acquired resistance limits their use as monotherapies (16, 17).
A recent clinical trial led to the FDA approval of the EZH2 methyltransferase inhibitor tazemetostat (TAZ) as the first targeted therapy for SMARCB1-deficient epithelioid sarcomas (15). However, only 15% of patients showed objective clinical responses, with most epithelioid sarcomas being resistant to TAZ. Ongoing clinical trials in patients with rhabdoid tumors have shown similar results, with only a subset of brain atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) patients exhibiting objective responses to TAZ, while extracranial rhabdoid tumors appear to be uniformly resistant (18). Recent studies have nominated the histone methyltransferase NSD1 as a regulator of TAZ susceptibility in rhabdoid tumor cells, but the clinical relevance of this mechanism is currently not known (19). In all, the outcomes for most patients with MRT and ES remain dismal, and the mechanisms of clinical response and resistance to EZH2 inhibition remain unknown. This hinders our ability to stratify treatment using prospective biomarkers to identify patients who may benefit from TAZ and to develop effective combination therapies with improved and durable benefits for patients.
Here, we define the key requirements for effective epigenetic therapy in diverse SMARCB1-deficient epithelioid sarcomas and rhabdoid tumors in vivo. Using comparative genomic analyses of clinical trial patients treated with TAZ, we identify multiple acquired mutations that cause therapy resistance. Using functional genomic approaches, we show that resistance mechanisms converge on a common RB1/E2F axis that integrates control of tumor cell division and differentiation. This organizes patient resistance mutations into a general framework, allowing us to develop a rational combination therapy to circumvent TAZ resistance. Using diverse patient-derived ES and MRT cell lines and mouse xenografts, we demonstrate a cell cycle bypass treatment strategy suitable for immediate translation to combination clinical trials for patients.

### Results


### Patient tumor sequencing reveals diverse resistance mutations

To identify mutations associated with clinical resistance to TAZ, we performed targeted gene sequencing of patient tumors using MSK-IMPACT, which is based on a panel of over 500 genes recurrently mutated in diverse cancer types (20). We analyzed 33 tumor specimens from 20 patients treated as part of the recent TAZ clinical trial (15), and identified somatic tumor mutations in matched pre- and post-treatment specimens (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). We found distinct sets of somatic mutations in responding and non-responding tumors, with nearly all mutations, apart from SMARCB1 loss itself, being exclusive to either TAZ-responsive or TAZ-resistant tumors (Figure 1A, top panel). Strikingly, we observed two tumors which initially responded to TAZ based on radiographic imaging but later developed clinical resistance (Figure 1A, bottom panel, 1B). Targeted sequencing of the resistant tumors revealed two newly acquired somatic mutations: heterozygous missense mutation of EZH2 (EZH2Y666N) in the Patient 3 tumor specimen, and biallelic loss of function mutations of RB1, including a hemizygous deletion and a frame shift mutation (RB1del) in the remaining allele, in the Patient 15 tumor specimen. We confirmed both mutations using RNA-seq of the respective tumor specimens (Figure S1A–B). Since one mutation affected EZH2 directly, and the other involved the known EZH2 target RB1 (21), we hypothesized that both mutations were responsible for TAZ resistance in their respective patients.
First, we investigated the EZH2Y666N mutation. Past studies using forward genetic screens in lymphoma cell lines have identified putative resistance mutations within both the N-terminal D1 domain and the catalytic SET domain of EZH2, both of which are predicted to interact with S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-competitive EZH2 inhibitors such as TAZ (22, 23). One such SET domain mutation previously identified in cell lines is EZH2Y661D. Y661 corresponds to Y666 in isoform 2 of EZH2, the isoform referred to in this study, and thus is concordant with the mutation we observed in the Patient 3 tumor (22).
Based on the atomic resolution structure of a pyridone-based EZH2 inhibitor bound to the Anolis carolinensis EZH2 (PDB 5IJ7) (24), we reasoned that residue Y666 in human EZH2 may form a critical part of the TAZ binding site and that its mutation can prevent TAZ from binding to the SET domain (Figure 1C). To test EZH2Y666N as a resistance allele, we expressed doxycycline-inducible EZH2Y666N in SMARCB1-deficient G401 rhabdoid tumor cells. We observed that EZH2Y666N expressing clones are resistant to TAZ as compared to cells expressing equal levels of wild-type EZH2 by assessing both cell viability (Figure 1D; 2.2-fold and 2.8-fold doxycycline-dependent increase in TAZ-treated cell viability for clones 3 and 8, respectively) and cell morphology (Figure S1C). The resistance phenotype of EZH2Y666N-expressing cells depends on the intact catalytic activity of the SET domain, as the compound mutant combining the catalytically inactive triple mutant EZH2F672I,H694A,R732K (EZH2CatMut) with the Y666N mutation, termed EZH2QuadMut, did not confer resistance to TAZ (Figure S1D). This indicates that the EZH2Y666N mutation does not significantly interfere with enzymatic activity. We also observed that EZH2Y666N confers resistance to the dual EZH1/2 inhibitor valemetostat (25), consistent with putative resistance to SAM-competitive, pyridone-based EZH2 inhibitors (Figure S1E). This suggests that combined inhibition of EZH2 and EZH1 may not overcome this type of acquired EZH2 inhibitor resistance.
Previous studies found that lymphoma cells resistant to EZH2 inhibitors remained susceptible to the inhibition of the non-enzymatic PRC2 subunit EED (26), including those with mutations in the EZH2 SET domain (EZH2C663Y and EZH2Y726F) and the D1 domain (23, 27). We therefore hypothesized that TAZ resistance conferred by EZH2Y666N could be overcome by PRC2 inhibitors that do not bind to EZH2. Indeed, we found that the allosteric EED inhibitor MAK683 overcomes EZH2Y666N-mediated resistance (28), demonstrating that these cells remain generally susceptible to PRC2 inhibition (Figure 1D; 2.1-fold and 2.2-fold reduction in MAK683 vs. TAZ-treated cell viability for clones 3 and 8, respectively). EED inhibition may thus be an effective strategy to overcome acquired TAZ resistance mutations in EZH2.
Past work has shown that EZH2 
[...truncated]