# The dTAG system for immediate and target-specific protein degradation.

**PMID:** 29581585
**Journal:** Nature chemical biology (2018)
**Authors:** Nabet B, Roberts JM, Buckley DL et al.
**PMC:** PMC6295913
**Search context:** crispr_target_discovery

## Full Text

Genetic mechanisms for modulating abundance of gene products, such as RNA interference and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, are powerful means to determine the functional consequence of loss or gain of a target gene. However, these methodologies fall short in their ability to assess acute changes, particularly for proteins required for cell growth and survival. Small-molecule perturbations allow for the rapid assessment of biological responses, but are often limited by the time to creation of selective chemical matter, the selective disruption of discrete domain function, and off-target effects. We therefore undertook efforts to create a hybrid chemical biology system to leverage the temporal experimental benefits of small molecules with the precision of genetics.
The degradation tag (dTAG) system is predicated upon our recent description of an all-chemical solution for target-specific protein degradation1. This prior research demonstrated selective degradation of BET bromodomain transcriptional co-activators (BRD2, BRD3, BRD4) using heterobifunctional degraders that bridge BET bromodomains to an E3 ubiquitin ligase (cereblon; CRBN). Catalytic-like biochemical activity of these small molecules allows rapid and target-specific turnover without degradation of the ligand. Use of E3-binding heterobifunctional degraders has now been validated for BRD41–4, and extended to FKBP121, ERRα5, RIPK25 and BRD96. Chemical probes established by this approach will powerfully enable the study of target biology, but each requires the up-front identification of a target-selective ligand. We therefore envisioned a single, generalizable approach to rapidly degrade allele-specific protein chimeras for biological investigation and early target validation.
Tag-based technologies to influence protein homeostasis have been pursued intently in the discipline of chemical biology. Exemplary technologies include induced displacement of cryptic degrons7, degradation of HaloTag fusion proteins via hydrophobic tagging8 or HaloPROTACs9, small molecule assisted shutoff (SMASh)10, and the auxin-inducible degron (AID)11. Selective stabilization of a target protein known as the Shield system has also been described. This system involves expression of a protein chimera involving a destabilized mutant allele of FKBP12, which is stabilized upon administration of a directed ligand, Shield-112. This system has been well utilized to study gain-of-function in complex biological systems13, 14. Inspired by this research, we endeavored to create a comparable loss-of-function solution to resolve target biology and dependencies in cells and in mice.

### RESULTS


### dTAG molecules engage FKBP12

To establish the more generalizable concept of all-chemical protein degradation, we previously reported the feasibility of degrading a cytosolic prolyl isomerase, FKBP12 (FKBP1A, also referred to herein as FKBP12WT), by heterobifunctional degraders (dFKBP-1 (1)) that recruit CRBN1. We initially considered expressing target proteins as an FKBP12WT chimera for biological investigation, but were concerned about confounding biological effects of endogenous FKBP12WT disruption. Engineered variants of FKBP12 were previously described by Ariad Pharmaceuticals (e.g. FKBP12F36V), that create a cavity (or “hole”) in FKBP12 allowing selective recognition by a “bumped” synthetic FKBP12F36V-directed ligand, AP186715. We hypothesized that an FKBP12F36V chimera might be selectively degraded by heterobifunctional FKBP12F36V and CRBN chemical inducers of dimerization (Fig. 1a).
To this end, we appended CRBN ligands to AP1867 as well as a novel regioisomer with varying linker length and composition to create a series of heterobifunctional degraders (dTAG-7 (2), dTAG-13 (3), dTAG-48 (4), dTAG-51 (5); Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1a). To biochemically evaluate the selectivity of these molecules, we developed FKBP12WT, FKBP12F36V, and CRBN-DDB1 ligand-displacement assays, using a nanomaterial-based proximity assay (AlphaScreen)16. These experiments test the ability of dTAG molecules to compete for binding to FKBP12WT and FKBP12F36V with a biotin-conjugated FKBP12WT-directed ligand (bio-SLF (6)) or to CRBN with a biotin-conjugated thalidomide (bio-Thal (7)) (Supplementary Fig. 1b–e). As expected, we observed a dose-dependent decrease in luminescence upon incubation of dFKBP-1 with FKBP12WT, FKBP12F36V, and CRBN, validating competition in each context (Fig. 1c–e and Supplementary Table 1). Comparative evaluation of dTAG molecules found that ortho-substituted molecules (dTAG-7 and dTAG-13) favorably engaged with FKBP12F36V and CRBN, with limited activity towards FKBP12WT (Fig. 1c-e, Supplementary Fig. 2a–c and Supplementary Table 1). In contrast, meta-substituted molecules (dTAG-48 and dTAG-51), despite being remarkably potent in their ability to engage FKBP12F36V and CRBN, had significant affinity for FKBP12WT.
To assess the adaptor function of the putative chemical degraders, we developed a CRBN-DDB1/FKBP12F36V dimerization assay, again using a luminescence proximity format as we previously reported for CRBN-DDB1/BRD41 (Supplementary Fig. 2d). dFKBP-1 and all dTAG molecules exhibited a dose-dependent increase in luminescence, supporting effective heterodimerization of CRBN-DDB1 and FKBP12F36V (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 2e). As expected, loss of luminescence with excess concentrations of dTAG molecules was observed, obeying the characteristic “hook effect” behavior17 upon saturation of CRBN and FKBP12F36V binding sites. Collectively, these biochemical data identify dTAG-7 and dTAG-13 as FKBP12F36V-selective heterodimerizers that effectively engage FKBP12F36V and CRBN.

### Cellular target degradation by dTAG-7 and dTAG-13

To assay dose-dependent effects on FKBP12WT and FKBP12F36V degradation in cells, we employed a modified version of a dual luciferase assay18. FKBP12WT and FKBP12F36V were subcloned as in-frame fusions to nano-luciferase (Nluc) and expressed on a multicistronic mRNA with control firefly luciferase (Fluc) (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Measurement of Nluc:Fluc ratios allows for determination of FKBP12 fusion protein degradation relative to the internal Fluc control, independent of effects on transcription. We first transduced 293FT CRBN wild-type (293FTWT) cells with FKBP12WT-Nluc or FKBP12F36V-Nluc and observed that dTAG-7 and dTAG-13 potently reduced the bioluminescent signal of FKBP12F36V-Nluc, with limited effect on FKBP12WT-Nluc, consistent with the observed selectivity in biochemical experiments (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 2). By contrast, dFKBP-1 and dTAG-48 indiscriminately diminished bioluminescent signal of both FKBP12WT-Nluc and FKBP12F36V-Nluc, corroborating our biochemical experiments that dTAG-48 exhibits off-target activity (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 2). We further evaluated the selectivity of our dTAG molecules by monitoring degradation of IKZF1, a previously described neo-substrate of CRBN upon immunomodulatory drug treatment18, 19, using a dual luciferase IKZF1 reporter system in 293T cells18. Compared to lenalidomide and pomalidomide, dTAG-7, dTAG-13 and dTAG-48 treatment had limited effect on bioluminescent signal, indicating little to no off-target IKZF1 activity (Supplementary Fig. 3c–d and Supplementary Table 3). However, dTAG-51 diminished bioluminescent signal to levels comparable to lenalidomide and pomalidomide, indicating off-target activity towards IKZF1. Due to the limited off-target activity towards FKBP12WT and IKZF1, we selected dTAG-7 and dTAG-13 as lead heterobifunctional degraders for further characterization.
To evaluate the potency, selectivity, and CRBN-dependency of dTAG-7 and dTAG-13 in cells, we transduced isogenic 293FT CRBN deficient (293FTCRBN−/−) cells18 with FKBP12WT-Nluc or FKBP12F36V-Nluc and used immunodetection of the hemagglutinin (HA)-tag to monitor changes in Nluc. dTAG-7 and dTAG-13 treatment, at doses as low as 100 nM, potent
[...truncated]