# TBK1, a prioritized drug repurposing target for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: evidence from druggable genome Mendelian randomization and pharmacological verification in vitro.

**PMID:** 38443977
**Journal:** BMC medicine (2024)
**Authors:** Duan QQ, Wang H, Su WM et al.
**PMC:** PMC10916235
**Search context:** genetic_target_validation

## Full Text


### Background

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal motor neuron disease characterized by progressive degeneration of nerve cells in the spinal cord and brain, leading to disability and eventual death of patients from respiratory failure. The prevalence of ALS is about 5 in 100,000, while patients usually die within 2 to 5 years of onset [1]. Due to a lack of understanding in its pathogenesis, formidable challenges have been historically posed on therapeutic approaches. Currently, riluzole, edaravone, AMX0035, and tofersen have been approved by FDA for treating ALS by reducing glutamate release, acting as an antioxidant, mitigating mitochondrial dysfunction, as well as down-regulating superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) protein level, respectively. However, most of them were demonstrated to slightly slow down ALS progression by a couple of months [2, 3]. Therefore, it is a priority to develop more efficient chemical compounds for urgent need to treat this devastating disease.
Accurately identifying drug candidates for particular disease subtypes and verifying their impacts on disease progression are prerequisites in drug development. However, due to the small sample size of the trial cohort, genetic complexity and heterogeneity, and insufficient drug efficacy or safety data, most clinical trials for newly developed drugs have to be terminated with unsatisfactory results [4]. Meanwhile, several studies have reported that the genetically supported drug-repurposing strategies could double the success rates in clinical development [5], and numerous large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified many single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with ALS risk, offering possibilities for shortening the innovation period of ALS drug. According to Mendel’s law of independent segregation, genetic variants are randomly allocated to individuals during gamete formation and fertilization. Mendelian randomization (MR) applies these genetic variants (instrumental variables, IVs) to study causality with less confounding or unbias than that in traditional epidemiological methods. Therefore, MR has been considered an ingenious method to harness high power and fidelity of randomization in human biomedical research [6, 7]. The druggable genes, as described by Finan et al. [8], refers to the selection of genes that have the potential to serve as targets for pharmacological intervention. In drug-target MR analysis, cis-expression quantitative trait loci (cis-eQTL) located in the genomic region of the drug-target gene are often considered proxies, which have been intensively utilized to analyze the regulatory relationship between nucleotide variants and gene expression fluctuations [9, 10]. Such MR analyses have been applied to multiple diseases, such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) [11] and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [12].
ALS GWAS have revealed numerous genes that exhibit statistical associations with the disease [13]. Among them, TNFSF12, also called TWEAK, has been researched in tumors, autoimmune disease, and inflammatory diseases [14–18]. Studies have shown that TNFSF12 plays a crucial role as an apoptosis inducer in the pathogenesis of muscle atrophy and is associated with neuroinflammation in multiple sclerosis [19, 20]. GPX3 is abundantly present in neurons, the brain, and other tissues [21]. It is a well-known glutathione peroxidase, performing antioxidant functions associated with well-recognized ALS gene like SOD1 [22, 23]. TBK1 gene encoding TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) has been shown to closely interplay with ALS development. Multiple loss-of-function mutations on TBK1 gene have been identified across sporadic and familial instances of ALS, as well as in cases of ALS/frontotemporal dementia (ALS-FTD/FTD) [24]. On the other hand, within ALS subtypes linked to gain-of-function mutations of SOD1 or TARDBP (encoding TAR DNA-binding protein, TDP-43), it has been observed that mitochondrial damage caused by mutated proteins could potentially stimulate the release of mitochondrial DNA, thereby activating the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)/stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway to potently initiate or aggravate neuroinflammation [25, 26]. Nowadays, extensive cellular and animal studies have demonstrated the protective effects of chemical inhibitors targeting upper stream factors like STING and cGAS in ALS models, while breakthroughs in clinical application remain to be achieved [25, 27].
In the current study, we obtained eQTL data for the druggable genome and conducted MR with the outcome of ALS GWAS to identify potential druggable genes associated with ALS. Through further colocalization analysis, we obtained the target genes with the stronger genetic association, including TBK1, TNFSF12, RESP18, and GPX3. Subsequently, we delved into ALS-repurposed drugs related to druggable genes through a series of criteria and identified R788 and AMX. Moreover, we conducted further research into druggable gene targets and the pharmacological effects of their targeted drugs in the context of ALS cell models. Lastly, AMX and R788 were verified to hold the therapeutic potential in attenuating ALS progression via dampened neuroinflammation.

### Methods

All DNA positions are based on the human reference genome build hg19 (GRCh37). Data processing was completed using R software version 4.1.1. The main R package involved in this study included “TwoSampleMR”, “dplyr”, “ieugwasr”, “org.Hs.eg.db “, “Homo. sapiens”, and “coloc”. This MR study was in accordance with the guidelines of Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology using Mendelian Randomization (STROBE-MR) [28, 29]. The checklist is elaborated in detail in Additional file 1: Table S1. Flowchart of our study is shown in Fig. 1A-D.Fig. 1Graphical abstract of genetic instrument variants selection, Mendelian randomization, identification of repurposing drugs discovery, and pharmacological analysis. A Obtaining cis-eQTL data for druggable genes by overlapping discovery cis-eQTL data and confirmatory cis-eQTL data with potentially druggable genes. The SNP data obtained through filtering for cis-eQTL data for blood and brain tissue from eQTLGen and PsychENCODE, with located within ± 100 kb of the TSS and meeting the FDR < 0.05 criteria, is considered as “Discovery cis-eQTL data”. The different sets of SNPs based on various additional selection criteria and multiple eQTL datasets are considered as “Confirmatory cis-eQTL data.” B Workflow showing the MR study and repurposing drugs discovery. Identifying druggable genes with strong genetic associations through the MR and colocalization analysis, further exploring treatment drugs associated with these druggable genes that meet the inclusion criteria. C R788 and AMX inhibit MSA-2-induced cGAS-STING signaling activation. D R788 and AMX inhibit ALS-related toxic protein mediated cGAS/STING signaling. MR Mendelian randomization, cis-eQTL cis-expression quantitative trait loci, ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Graphical abstract of genetic instrument variants selection, Mendelian randomization, identification of repurposing drugs discovery, and pharmacological analysis. A Obtaining cis-eQTL data for druggable genes by overlapping discovery cis-eQTL data and confirmatory cis-eQTL data with potentially druggable genes. The SNP data obtained through filtering for cis-eQTL data for blood and brain tissue from eQTLGen and PsychENCODE, with located within ± 100 kb of the TSS and meeting the FDR < 0.05 criteria, is considered as “Discovery cis-eQTL data”. The different sets of SNPs based on various additional selection criteria and multiple eQTL datasets are considered as “Confirmatory cis-eQTL data.” B Workflow showing the MR study and repurposing drugs discovery. Identifying druggable genes with strong genetic associations through the MR and colocalization analysis, further exploring treatment drugs associated with these druggable genes 
[...truncated]