# Genome-wide association and multi-trait analyses characterize the common genetic architecture of heart failure.

**PMID:** 36376295
**Journal:** Nature communications (2022)
**Authors:** Levin MG, Tsao NL, Singhal P et al.
**PMC:** PMC9663424
**Search context:** convergent_evidence_moa

## Full Text


### Introduction

Heart failure (HF) is a common cardiovascular syndrome characterized by symptoms including shortness of breath, volume-overload, and functional limitation that result from structural or functional impairment of ventricular filling or ejection of blood1–4. HF affects >38 million individuals globally, with rapidly growing prevalence, and is a major cause of cardiovascular morbidity, mortality, hospitalization, and healthcare costs5. Despite the prevalence of HF, the role of common genetic variation in HF risk remains poorly understood. In comparison to other common cardiometabolic traits like coronary artery disease (CAD), myocardial infarction, diabetes, blood pressure, and obesity, where hundreds of genetic loci have been associated with disease risk, discovery of common genetic sequence variants associated with HF has been modest, with only 11 genomic loci identified in the largest genome-wide association study (GWAS) of HF to date6.
Several strategies have been described to improve power for GWAS locus discovery. One approach, particularly useful for improving the generalizability of GWAS findings, is to improve the genetic diversity of participants included in the study. Simulation and empiric studies have identified power gains of multi-ancestry GWAS7, recently demonstrated with applications to CAD and blood lipids8,9. Refining clinical phenotypes is another effective approach to improve detection of common variant associations. This approach may be particularly relevant, as HF is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome10. For example, in prior work parsing dilated cardiomyopathy from all-cause HF using diagnosis and procedure codes facilitated the identification of common-genetic variation in genes associated with Mendelian forms of cardiomyopathy11. More recently, statistical methods that jointly consider related phenotypes have been developed. These multi-trait GWAS methods leverage the shared genetic relationships between related traits, and have been shown to improve power for genetic discovery across a range of diseases12–14. For example, a recent multi-trait analysis jointly considered hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy, and cardiac imaging traits, successfully identifying novel common genetic variants associated with these traits15. Because structural cardiac abnormalities and dysfunction of the left ventricle are key contributors to the development of clinical HF, and these traits share genetic architecture, we hypothesized that jointly considering HF and related continuous quantitative cardiac imaging phenotypes within a multi-trait GWAS framework may similarly improve power for genetic discovery.
In this study, we report a multi-ancestry meta-analysis of HF genome-wide association studies to estimate the effect of common genetic sequence variants on all-cause HF risk. We integrate GWAS of cardiac imaging endophenotypes and HF using multivariate GWAS methods to further improve power for locus discovery. Finally, we evaluate the genetic evidence for these associations using colocalization, transcriptome-wide association, gene-expression profiling, and Mendelian randomization. In summary, this study identifies previously unreported HF risk variants and putative effector genes, prioritizes relevant tissues, highlights roles for common genetic sequence variation in the pathogenesis of HF and related traits, and identifies circulating proteins associated with HF and cardiovascular imaging phenotypes.

### Results


### Multi-ancestry HF meta-analysis identifies 47 risk loci

The overall study design is presented in Fig. 1. We conducted a multi-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis of all-cause HF, including 115,150 HF cases and 1,550,331 controls of diverse genetic ancestry, assembled from large consortia and medical biobanks (HERMES, Penn Medicine Biobank, eMERGE, Mount Sinai BioMe, Geisinger DiscovEHR, FinnGen, and the Global Biobank Meta-analysis Initiative)6,16–19 (Supplementary Data 1 and Supplemental Fig. 1). In the discovery phase, we identified 939 variants at 47 loci where genetic associations reached the genome-wide significance (GWS) threshold (p < 5 × 10−8) (Fig. 2A and Supplementary Data 2). Of the 12 independent variants previously reported from the HERMES consortium GWAS of all-cause HF6, 10 remained genome-wide significant in the current analysis (p < 5 × 10−8), and the remaining two were significant at a Bonferroni-adjusted threshold (p < 0.05/12). Of the 47 loci we identified, 34 were located >500 kb from the lead variants reported by the largest published GWAS of all-cause HF6. Consistent with prior reports6, the strongest association with HF was found at the PITX2 locus (Fig. 2B). There was nominal evidence of heterogeneity at PITX2, LPA, CDKN2B, and RP11-116D17.1 loci by genetic ancestry, but these effects were not significant after accounting for multiple testing (0.05/47 < I2
p value <0.05) (Supplementary Data 2).Fig. 1Study overview.Overview of major study analyses to identify HF-associated genetic variants, shared risk loci with other traits/diseases, prioritize genes/tissues/cell types, and identify potential treatment targets. GWAS genome-wide association study, HF heart failure, LD linkage disequilibrium.Fig. 2Genome-wide associations for heart failure.Results of the multi-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis of all-cause heart failure, performed using a fixed-effect inverse variance weighted model. A Manhattan plot of genome-wide significant (p < 5 × 10−8) associations. Each point represents a genetic variant. Variants in red are located +/−500 kb of a genome-wide significant locus. The x-axis represents the genomic position, and the y-axis represents the strength of association as represented by −log10(p value). B Candidate genes were assigned to each genome-wide significant variant (p < 5 × 10−8) in the multi-ancestry and ancestry-specific analyses (based on proximity to the nearest transcription start site). Candidate genes are grouped by chromosome. Previously unreported candidate genes (>500 kb from a previously reported locus) are denoted by stars. The size of each point corresponds to the strength of association as represented by −log10(p value). Where multiple independent variants mapped to the same gene, only the strongest association is shown.

### Study overview.

Overview of major study analyses to identify HF-associated genetic variants, shared risk loci with other traits/diseases, prioritize genes/tissues/cell types, and identify potential treatment targets. GWAS genome-wide association study, HF heart failure, LD linkage disequilibrium.

### Genome-wide associations for heart failure.

Results of the multi-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis of all-cause heart failure, performed using a fixed-effect inverse variance weighted model. A Manhattan plot of genome-wide significant (p < 5 × 10−8) associations. Each point represents a genetic variant. Variants in red are located +/−500 kb of a genome-wide significant locus. The x-axis represents the genomic position, and the y-axis represents the strength of association as represented by −log10(p value). B Candidate genes were assigned to each genome-wide significant variant (p < 5 × 10−8) in the multi-ancestry and ancestry-specific analyses (based on proximity to the nearest transcription start site). Candidate genes are grouped by chromosome. Previously unreported candidate genes (>500 kb from a previously reported locus) are denoted by stars. The size of each point corresponds to the strength of association as represented by −log10(p value). Where multiple independent variants mapped to the same gene, only the strongest association is shown.
We sought replication in data from the VA Million Veteran Program (43,344 HF cases, and 258,943 controls of European Ancestry)20 and Mass General Brigham Biobank (5,542 HF cases and 20,242 controls of European Ancestry). Of 47 genome-wide significant risk loci in our analysis, 44 were available for replication 
[...truncated]