# Preexisting Skin-Resident CD8 and gammadelta T-cell Circuits Mediate Immune Response in Merkel Cell Carcinoma and Predict Immunotherapy Efficacy.

**PMID:** 39058036
**Journal:** Cancer discovery (2024)
**Authors:** Reinstein ZZ, Zhang Y, Ospina OE et al.
**PMC:** PMC11954000
**Search context:** convergent_evidence_moa

## Full Text


### Introduction

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a highly aggressive primary neuroendocrine skin cancer, with high rates of metastasis and recurrence(1). There are two subtypes of MCC, with different etiologies and phenotypes. In 60–80% of MCCs, the Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is mutated and clonally integrated(2). They express obligate viral oncoproteins, small and truncated large T antigens, which drive carcinogenesis in part by inactivating p53 and pRB(3). Whereas virus positive (VP) MCCs inactivate pRB and p53 through the expression of the small and large T oncoproteins, virus negative (VN) MCCs achieve the same molecular endpoint through near universal somatic mutation of both RB1 and TP53(2,4).
VN-MCCs are immunogenic because of the high number of tumor neoantigens from high mutation burdens. VP-MCCs have a low mutation burden but are immunogenic because they constitutively express viral oncoproteins(4). Shared antigens in VP-MCCs ease identification of tumor-specific T cells across patients(5).
For metastatic disease, immunotherapy is the only Food and Drug Administration-approved therapy that significantly prolongs survival. Unfortunately, many patients have either primary (~50%) or acquired resistance (up to 25%) to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB)(6,7). To elucidate potential mechanisms, we compiled the largest MCC cohort with comprehensive multi-modal molecular analysis (n=116 patients), specifically focusing on the tumor microenvironment with bulk RNA-seq (n=71 patients), single-cell RNA-seq (n=360,069 cells from 64 patients), multiplexed immunofluorescence (n=41 patients), and spatial transcriptomics (n=20 patients). 46 patients had more than one sample. These methods complement each other, addressing limitations and offering insights across tumor-intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Our multi-omic studies identified clinically actionable biomarkers and therapeutic avenues for MCCs and potentially for other cancers.

### Results


### Compilation of a clinically and molecularly annotated MCC cohort

We collected the largest multi-institutional MCC dataset with multi-modal molecular characterization of 186 samples across 116 patients including 92 patients with evaluable ICB responses (Table 1, Fig. 1A, Supplementary Tables S1–S2, Methods). These include bulk RNA-Seq (n= 85 samples from 71 patients) (Supplementary Tables S3–S5, Supplementary Fig. S1A) and a modified form of ECCITE-Seq (n= 54 tumor samples from 48 patients; n= 55 blood samples from 32 patients) (Supplementary Table S6–S7, Supplementary Fig. S1B), including three samples previously reported(8). Moreover, 44 distinct samples were spatially profiled using multiplex immunofluorescence (mIF) imaging (Akoya Phenoimager), spatial cancer gene or whole transcriptome profiling (Nanostring GeoMx), and single-cell resolution spatial transcriptomics (Nanostring CosMx) (Fig. 1B, Supplementary Tables S8–S10, Supplementary Fig. S1C). Overall, 63 patients in our dataset were profiled using two or more modalities (Supplementary Fig. S2).

### Bulk RNA-seq reveals predictive biomarkers of response to ICB

First, we analyzed the bulk RNA-seq of tumors, pre-ICB, from a cohort of 63 patients with 62 patients that were systemic treatment naive to minimize confounding variables related to prior therapy. Within this dataset, there were 31 responders (partial or complete response) and 32 non-responders (stable and/or progressive disease) (Supplementary Fig. S1A, Supplementary Table S3, Methods).
Differential gene expression analysis revealed 800 upregulated genes in responders and 436 in non-responders (padj <0.1, DESeq2.0) (Fig. 1C, Supplementary Table S11). Many of the genes are characteristic of CD8 T cells (αβ TCR, GZMA, CD8A, CD8B), γδ T cells (γδ TCRs), B cells (IG genes, CD79A), and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (TLR7, LILRB4). Several molecules were associated with tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells, including markers of T cell exhaustion (HAVCR2, LAG3, and TIGIT) and cytotoxic activity (GZMB and PRF1). Collectively, these data suggest an enrichment of pre-existing CD8 T cells, B cells, and specific myeloid subtypes in responders.
Pathway analysis with Enrichr(9) showed upregulation of IFN-γ signaling (Padj. = 2.22e-63), IFN-α signaling (Padj. = 8.53e-52), and antigen presentation machinery (Padj. = 2.36e-17), associated with IFN-γ signaling in other cancers including melanoma(10) (Fig. 1D, 1E, Supplementary Table S12).
Non-responders had upregulated MCC-specific genes, like PAX6 and FOXA1. (Supplementary Table S11). Pathway analysis revealed additional enrichment of genes associated: 1) IL-1 processing(11), including IL1A and IL1B, and 2) E2F targets, which are normally expressed during cell division (Fig. 1F, 1G, Supplementary Table S12).

### Single cell RNA-seq reveals cellular composition of the tumor microenvironment and blood

Next, we conducted single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) initially on 49 tumor samples derived from 43 patients (Supplementary Table S6, Supplementary Fig. S1B). This included 8 samples from 4 patients across two timepoints (including 2 pairs of samples collected before and after ICB), 4 samples from 2 patients spanning different tissues (skin/lymph node pairs), and 37 single samples. Additionally, we analyzed 55 peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) samples from 32 patients. This included 21 pre/post-ICB pairs (42 samples), 2 samples from a third timepoint, and 11 samples that were unmatched. 26 of these samples were matched to patients that also had scRNA-seq on tumor tissue. (Fig. 1A, 1B, Supplementary Fig. S3–5, Supplementary Table S7). 313,757 cells were recovered from these samples using scRNA-seq. An additional cohort of 5 post treatment tumor samples with 46,312 cells were integrated and analyzed separately to investigate the cellular landscape after ICB for a total of 360,069 cells. Following quality control, we identified 27 distinct cell types in the tumor immune microenvironment, including CD8 T cells, CD4 T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, γδ T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, plasma cells, B cells, and plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDC) clusters (Fig. 2A, 2B, Supplementary Fig. S3, S4A, Supplementary Table S13).

### Types I and II Interferon signatures in tumor cells predict response

First, we analyzed the 60,902 tumor cells, which were marked by the expression of neuroendocrine transcription factor ATOH1 and chromogranin(3). We examined expression of the viral oncogenes small T antigen (sTAg) or large T antigen (LTAg) by scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq. 26/43 patients had samples with multiple reads for both sTAg and LTAg and were thus considered VP. The remainder had no transcriptional evidence of MCPyV sTAg or LTAg expression, which we labeled VN.
Next, we performed differential gene and pathway expression analyses (Supplementary Table S14, Fig. 2C). In responders, we observed upregulation of multiple pathways. Similar to bulk RNA-seq, there was upregulation of genes associated with IFN-γ (STAT1, MX1, IRF1) as well as IFN-α (OAS1, IFI27, IRF9). Again, many IFN-γ−associated genes are implicated in antigen presentation (i.e., HLA-I, HLA-II, ERAP2) (Fig. 2D, Supplementary Table S15). Next, we ran SCENIC regulon analysis to identify significant transcription factor-associated transcriptional networks. Top regulons in responders highlighted type I/II interferon responses (IRF7, IRF9, STAT1, IRF1). (Fig. 2E, Supplementary Table S16).
We calculated a module score to quantify IFN-γ and IFN responses using previously described methods(10,12). IFN-α and IFN-γ response module scores were highly correlated (Pearson correlation, R2 = 0.928, p < 1e-10). Both signatures were associated with the infiltration of immune cells, suggestive of pre-existing immunity (Fig. 2F). The source of type I interferons was not clear because it was not well captured by scRNA-seq. However, subsequent analyses showed that the IFN-α module score in multiple cell types (tumor
[...truncated]