# Oncostatin M drives intestinal inflammation and predicts response to tumor necrosis factor-neutralizing therapy in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

**PMID:** 28368383
**Journal:** Nature medicine (2017)
**Authors:** West NR, Hegazy AN, Owens BMJ et al.
**PMC:** PMC5420447
**Search context:** osmr_ibd

## Full Text


### Introduction

IBD is an etiologically complex inflammatory disorder, involving the interaction of genetic predisposition, environmental triggers, microbial dysbiosis, and perturbation of immune homeostasis1–4. Immune dysregulation in IBD depends on the inappropriate production of diverse pro-inflammatory cytokines, which orchestrate intestinal inflammation and constitute attractive targets for therapeutic development5,6. Indeed, blockade of TNF using monoclonal antibodies (anti-TNF therapy) is now firmly established as an effective therapeutic approach for IBD. Nevertheless, up to 40% of patients with IBD exhibit primary non-responsiveness to anti-TNF therapy, and many patients who are initially responsive develop therapeutic resistance7,8. Various other cytokines have been targeted in clinical trials (including interferon (IFN)-γ, IL-6, and IL-17A) but their blockade has generally resulted in negligible efficacy or, in the case of IL-17A, deleterious side effects in subgroups of patients5,9. Therefore, we sought to identify novel cytokines that could potentially serve as alternative therapeutic targets to TNF. In a large number of IBD patients, we identified OSM (Oncostatin M) as a highly expressed cytokine that is associated with anti-TNF resistant disease. Furthermore, OSM was found to promote intestinal pathology in an anti-TNF resistant mouse model of IBD. Intriguingly, OSM appears to promote intestinal inflammation by inducing chemokine, cytokine, and adhesion factor expression in gut-resident stromal cells, which express high amounts of the OSM receptor-β (OSMR).
OSM is part of the IL-6 cytokine family, which shares gp130 as a receptor subunit10. Depending on the cell type, human OSM can induce signalling via the JAK-STAT pathway (including JAK1, JAK2, STAT1, STAT3, STAT5, and possibly STAT6), the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway, and mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades via heterodimeric receptors comprised of gp130 and either OSMR or leukemia inhibitory factor receptor-β (LIFR)11,12. By contrast, mouse OSM is thought to mediate similar signal transduction mainly via gp130-OSMR heterodimers11,12. OSM supports diverse homeostatic processes, including liver repair, cardiac tissue remodeling, osteoclastogenesis, and hematopoiesis11,12. However, overproduction of OSM is thought to promote a variety of pathologies, including skin and lung inflammation, atherosclerosis, and several forms of cancer11,12. Interestingly, a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the human OSM locus is strongly associated with risk of developing IBD13. Nevertheless, the role of OSM in IBD has remained unclear11,14,15.

### Results


### OSM and OSMR are highly expressed in IBD

To identify additional cytokines that may promote IBD pathogenesis, we analyzed cytokine mRNA expression in intestinal mucosal biopsies from previously published cohorts of patients with clinically active CD (n=162 CD versus n=42 non-IBD controls; RNA-seq data) or UC (n=74 UC versus n=11 non-IBD controls; Affymetrix microarray data)16,17. 64 candidate cytokines with data available in both studies were examined. Of these, only 4 were significantly enriched in inflamed tissue in both cohorts compared to non-IBD controls: IL6, IL1A, IL1B, and OSM (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table 1). Of these cytokines, OSM is the least well characterized in the gut, and we therefore chose to investigate it further. Among untreated paediatric patients with newly diagnosed CD16, we found OSM to be the most highly and consistently expressed cytokine relative to healthy control mucosa (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 1). Furthermore, OSM was particularly enriched in patients with deep mucosal ulcerations (Fig. 1c). While OSMR was similarly enriched in IBD mucosa, this was not true of LIFR or IL6ST (gp130) (Fig. 1c).
To validate our initial findings, we used quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR) to examine OSM and OSMR expression in freshly isolated biopsies from IBD patients and healthy controls who underwent routine endoscopy at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford (for associated clinical information, see Supplementary Table 2). This confirmed high expression of OSM and OSMR in tissue from IBD patients with active disease (Fig. 1d), and also revealed a close correlation between OSM/OSMR expression and histopathological disease severity (Fig. 1e). No difference in expression of either OSM or OSMR was observed in patients with CD or UC (Fig. 1f). Analysis of transcriptomic data from four different countries16–20 further confirmed that OSM and OSMR are consistently over-expressed in the intestinal mucosa of patients with active IBD (total control n=99, total IBD n=370; Supplementary Table 3). Neither OSM nor OSMR expression correlated with standard clinical parameters including gender, age at diagnosis, disease duration, serum c-reactive protein (CRP), peripheral blood leukocyte count, or treatment with pharmacological therapies; however, OSM and OSMR expression was increased in patients with IBD who required surgery, suggesting an association with treatment-resistant or complicated disease (Supplementary Fig. 1).

### OSM expression is associated with response to TNF-neutralizing therapy

Hierarchical clustering of cytokine and chemokine expression in two IBD cohorts revealed that OSM is consistently associated with a discrete module of inflammatory mediators (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 2). Although molecular correlates of anti-TNF response have been reported previously, there are currently no clinically accepted predictive biomarkers of anti-TNF response for IBD18,21–23. We therefore asked whether the OSM-associated inflammatory module was associated with responsiveness to anti-TNF therapy. Among patients refractory to corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive therapies, unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on expression of OSM-associated module genes revealed that high module expression in pre-treatment biopsies was strongly associated with primary non-responsiveness to anti-TNF therapy (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 3a–b). Complete mucosal healing (based on endoscopic and histological criteria) following infliximab (Remicade) therapy was achieved by 69–85% of patients with low OSM module expression, but was observed in only 10–15% of those with high OSM module expression (Fig. 2c, Supplementary Fig. 3b). Notably, baseline expression of OSM and OSMR alone was strongly associated with poor primary response to infliximab in three different cohorts (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Fig. 3c–d)18,22,23. Indeed, at the whole transcriptome level, OSM was among the 20 most strongly expressed genes in anti-TNF resistant patients compared to anti-TNF responders (Supplementary Table 4). Baseline OSM and OSMR expression was also elevated in patients who responded initially to infliximab but relapsed by week 30 post-treatment (Supplementary Fig. 3d).
The association between mucosal OSM expression and anti-TNF response was confirmed in two additional prospective patient cohorts from phase 3 clinical trials of moderate-to-severely active UC, one treated with intravenous infliximab (Fig. 2e–g), and the other treated with subcutaneous golimumab (Simponi), an alternative anti-TNF agent (Supplementary Fig. 3e–i)24,25. Unlike the cohorts described above, these trials categorized patients into response groups on the basis of improvement in clinical Mayo scores. This allowed us to assess patients who achieved full remission following therapy, those who partially responded (an improvement in Mayo score, but with remaining disease activity), and those who were completely non-responsive to therapy. While OSM was clearly most highly expressed in the non-responsive group of infliximab-treated patients (Fig. 2f), it was significantly elevated in both non-responders and partial responders who received golimumab (Supplementary Fig. 3f). Although OSM correlates broadly with inflammation severity in the overall IBD population (Fig. 1
[...truncated]