# Antibody-Drug Conjugates for Cancer Therapy.

**PMID:** 33081383
**Journal:** Molecules (Basel, Switzerland) (2020)
**Authors:** Hafeez U, Parakh S, Gan HK et al.
**PMC:** PMC7587605
**Search context:** adc_design

## Full Text


### 1. Introduction

Despite the range of new anti-cancer drugs in the market, there were 9.6 million deaths from cancer globally in 2018, with approximately one in six of all deaths being due to cancer [1]. A recent review concluded that most of the anti-cancer drugs that entered the market between 2009 and 2013 showed only marginal gains in terms of overall survival and that there is an urgent need to increase therapeutic efficacy [2]. Systemic therapies based on the use of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) started to emerge after the discovery of hybridoma technology by Kohler and Milstein in 1975. In 1988, Greg Winter pioneered the technique to humanize monoclonal antibodies and thereafter, therapeutic monoclonal antibodies have been successfully developed for the treatment of various cancers. To date, approximately 30 mAbs have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of cancer. The specificity of mAbs also makes them well suited for the targeted delivery of drugs to cancer cells whilst avoiding normal tissues. Monoclonal antibody technology has been further improved over the next decades by conjugating antibodies with cytotoxic drugs [3]. Such conjugates, called antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs), are targeted agents that link a cytotoxic drug (also called as cytotoxic payload or warhead) via a linker to a monoclonal antibody which specifically recognizes a cellular surface antigen and deliver toxic payload at the tumor site, thus improving the efficacy of chemotherapy and reducing systemic exposure and toxicity [4]. More than 80 ADCs are currently under clinical development worldwide [5,6]. In this paper, we provide an overview of the biology and chemistry of ADCs, discuss key components of ADC design and discuss the current status of clinically approved and underdeveloped ADCs. We also discuss resistance mechanisms to ADC, the role of molecular imaging in the clinical development of ADCs and give an opinion on future perspectives.

### 2. Design and Structure of Antibody–Drug Conjugates

The use of ADCs has evolved over time, becoming increasingly widespread as initial problems were overcome by better target selection, accompanied by improvements in payloads, linker technologies and conjugation techniques (Figure 1).

### 2.1. Target Selection

Unconjugated mAbs have various mechanisms of action including target receptor neutralization, receptor downregulation, signalling disruption, antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), complement-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (CDCC) and immune checkpoint inhibition [7,8]. On the other hand, ADCs rely on target receptor internalization to deliver the cytotoxic payload to the cancer cells. Hence, selecting an appropriate target antigen is a critical step for the success of an antibody–drug conjugate.
Ideally, the target antigen should be abundant on the cell surface to be available for binding by the circulating ADC, e.g., melanoma cell lines with p97 receptor expression levels from 80,000 to 280,000 receptors per cell showed sensitivity to ADC L49-vcMMAF, while other cancer cell lines with lower p97 expression were resistant to L49-vcMMAF [9]. However, various other ADCs have shown efficacy over a wide range of antigen expression levels based on other characteriztics of the target antigen, including binding affinity and rate of internalization. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin has demonstrated efficacy at a relatively low expression of CD33 (5000 to 10,000 receptors per cell) as compared to trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) which usually requires high ErbB2 expression levels (>2 million receptors per cell) [10,11]. The high surface expression of the antigen may not lead to ADC efficacy if trafficking into the tumor cell is impaired. Inge et al. [12] showed that after antibody binding CD21 does not effectively internalize, even when expressed at very high levels, resulting in a lack of efficacy with anti-CD21-MCC-DM1 ADCs. This study also showed that CD21 forms a complex with CD19 on the surface of B cells and prevents internalization of CD19 after it is bound to anti-CD19 antibody and decreasing anti-CD19-MCC-DM1 efficacy [12].
To minimize off-target toxicity, the target antigen should have exclusive or preferential expression on cancer cells with a minimal expression on healthy tissue. Four out of nine approved ADCs—inotuzumab ozogamicin, gemtuzumab ozogamicin, brentuximab vedotin, and polatuzumab vedotin—target lineage-specific markers that include CD22, CD33, CD30 and CD79, respectively. These antigens have consistent expression across the target cell population. The target antigen should also have minimal secretion in circulation from the cancer cells, as antibodies can bind to these secreted receptors in the circulation, thus limiting the amount of antibody available for target cell binding [13].
The target antigen should internalize efficiently upon ADC binding to allow the antigen–ADC complex to be internalized via receptor-mediated endocytosis, and it should undergo appropriate intracellular trafficking and degradation, thereby allowing the cytotoxic warhead to be released [14]. Target antigens on the cell surface can have variable rates for basal and antibody induced internalization which can affect ADC efficacy [12]. For example, CD74 antigen is rapidly internalized into target cells following antibody binding. The preclinical data for anti-CD74 ADC immu-110 showed similar efficacy to other ADCs that target slower internalizing antigens with more potent cytotoxic payloads [15]. Inadequate or inefficient internalization increases the chance of toxicity from inappropriate payload delivery outside the cancer cell [16]. Other factors which influence antigen–ADC internalization are binding epitope on target antigen and the affinity of the ADC to the antigen [10].
Lastly, antigens that are abundant in the circulation should also be avoided to prevent sequestration and/or degradation of the ADC in the circulation. More than 50 different known antigens have been used as targets in ADCs currently in preclinical or clinical development (Table 1).

### 2.2. Choice of Antibody

The selection of an appropriate antibody for ADC is also important and can have a significant impact on efficacy, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic profiles and therapeutic index. An ideal mAb for an ADC should be target specific with strong target binding affinity. In addition, it should have low immunogenicity, low cross-reactivity, efficient internalization and long plasma half-life [17,18]. Antibodies in human beings can be classified into five main classes: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM. These closely related immunoglobulins are composed of 82–96% protein and 4–18% carbohydrate; they differ in heavy chain structure and have distinct effector function. IgA is further subclassified into IgA1 and IgA2. IgG has been subdivided into IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 and IgG4. Due to its favourable characteriztics, scientists have focused on IgG class for therapeutics. An IgG antibody consists of two heavy chains and two light chains. It has two antigen binding fragments (Fabs) which mediate antigen recognition and a constant fragment (Fc), which mediates the binding of the antibody with effector cells of the immune system. The Fc fragment also regulates the half-life of the antibody in circulation through its interaction with FcRn (the neonatal Fc receptor for IgG) [19,20]. The IgG1 subtype is frequently used in antibody therapeutics due it its serum stability and strong binding affinity for Fc receptor. However, an increasing number of ADCs are based on Fc-silent mAbs and the suitability of Fc for an ADC is determined on a case by case basis [8,19,21,22,23,24]. However, Fcγ binding can also lead to undesirable adverse events. T-DM1 binds to FcγRIIa and internalized by megakaryocytes resulting in thrombocytopenia [25]. Another ADC, LOP628 consisting of c-Kit IgG1 antibody conjugated to maytansine, was found to induce h
[...truncated]