# Rapid evolution of blood-brain-barrier-penetrating AAV capsids by RNA-driven biopanning.

**PMID:** 33553485
**Journal:** Molecular therapy. Methods & clinical development (2021)
**Authors:** Nonnenmacher M, Wang W, Child MA et al.
**PMC:** PMC7841218
**Search context:** rna_therapeutics_delivery

## Full Text


### Introduction

Clinical applications of gene therapy in the central nervous system (CNS) are currently limited by the poor transduction of brain and spinal cord by adeno-associated virus (AAV) and other viral vectors.1,2 The blood-brain barrier (BBB) represents a formidable obstacle for delivery of AAV into brain tissue following intravenous administration, and even the best-in-class natural BBB-penetrating serotypes, namely AAV9 and other clade F derivatives,3,4 only allow limited brain distribution.1,5,6 This challenge can be partially overcome by using local delivery routes, such as intraparenchymal injection,7,8 intrathecal infusion,9 or cisterna magna administration.10 However, these methods are invasive and only achieve limited distribution and transduction throughout the brain and spinal cord, short of therapeutically desired coverage. These shortcomings could be mitigated by engineered AAV capsids capable of efficiently crossing the BBB via intravascular delivery.
High-throughput mutagenesis and directed evolution of AAV capsids were first described in 200311,12 and are greatly facilitated by the simplicity of the viral genome organization, extensive knowledge of capsid structure,13 and the natural propensity of wild-type AAV to assemble capsids with low mosaicism and high genome-capsid correlation.14, 15, 16 Early designs of AAV-directed evolution were strictly tailored for in vitro selection in cultured cells and used helper adenovirus coinfection to enrich transduction-competent variants.11,12,17,18 Helper-dependent selection is not easily accomplished in vivo, and library selection in the mouse initially relied on indiscriminate PCR amplification of AAV genomes from the tissue of interest.19 Although this approach proved successful to some degree, tremendous effort has been spent on developing new biopanning approaches to efficiently select true positives in vivo.20,21 Over the past decade, functional AAV library screens based on cell-specific sorting,22
in vivo helper virus coinfection,23 or cell-specific Cre-lox selection24, 25, 26 have identified improved capsid variants. In particular, two AAV9 variants, PHP.B and PHP.eB, showed an unprecedented ability to transduce C57BL/6 mouse brain via systemic injection.26,27 Follow-up studies, however, showed that these properties did not translate to other laboratory mouse strains or to non-human primates (NHPs).28, 29, 30
Importantly, Cre-dependent AAV library screening methods24, 25, 26 strictly rely on transgenic animals for specific recovery of transduction-competent variants, which precludes the use of clinically relevant animals such as NHPs. In this study, we describe TRACER (Tropism Redirection of AAV by Cell-type-specific Expression of RNA), an AAV evolution platform based on recovery of bulk capsid library RNA expressed in a cell-type-specific manner from non-transgenic animal tissue. We used TRACER in a directed evolution screen focused on mouse CNS and were able to isolate multiple capsid variants capable of widespread brain transduction via systemic administration. We demonstrate that TRACER is a highly effective AAV evolution platform, with potential applications in a broad range of tissues and non-transgenic animal species.

### Results


### Design and construction of AAV libraries with cell-type-specific expression vectors and biopanning

The AAV genome is transcriptionally repressed in the absence of helper virus.31,32 In order to generate transcription-competent libraries for RNA-driven directed evolution, we inserted a non-AAV promoter upstream of the Cap gene, which would confer cell-type expression specificity while retaining the minimal regulatory elements essential for capsid protein expression and stoichiometry (Figure 1A). We determined that a minimal Rep fragment starting at nucleotide 1700 that contains the AAV P40 promoter and splice donor and acceptor sequences was sufficient for efficient virus production, albeit with a lower yield than wild-type AAV (Figure S1).Figure 1Design of RNA recovery strategy for cell-specific biopanning(A) Map of wild-type AAV (top) and TRACER library vectors (bottom). ITR, inverted terminal repeat. Pro, promoter. Dashed lines indicate AAV intron (top) or synthetic CMV-globin intron (bottom), solid lines represent minor (thin line) and major (thick line) capsid transcripts. Primers used for the recovery of the 2.8-kb capsid library amplicon are indicated at the bottom. (B) Activity of CAG, SYN, and GFAP promoters in TRACER tandem configuration (left panel) or single promoter configuration (right panel). Depicted transgenes were packaged in AAV9 capsid and tested in HEK293T cells or primary mouse brain cells (1e5 VG/cell, n = 3). RNA was quantified by real-time RT-PCR 48 h post-treatment. Values indicate RNA expression normalized to CAG vectors in each cell type (mean ± SD). ∗p < 0.05 (t test). (C) Construction of peptide display libraries. Randomized sequences preceded by AQ, DG, or DGT residues were introduced in AAV9 VP1 at the indicated positions in vectors containing SYN or GFAP promoter. (D) Overview of the in vivo selection process. (1) DNA libraries are used to produce a virus library, (2) virus libraries are injected intravenously (i.v.) into mice (1e12VG per mouse), (3) bulk RNA is recovered from whole brains 28 days post-injection, (4) capsid fragments encoding the peptide library are amplified by RT-PCR, analyzed by next-generation sequencing (NGS), and cloned into TRACER vectors for another round of selection. (E) Example of RT-PCR products obtained from three mice 28 days after injection with SYN-driven and GFAP-driven library (top and middle panel, respectively). The 3-kb band from the molecular weight marker is indicated. Bottom panel: RT-negative controls.
Design of RNA recovery strategy for cell-specific biopanning
(A) Map of wild-type AAV (top) and TRACER library vectors (bottom). ITR, inverted terminal repeat. Pro, promoter. Dashed lines indicate AAV intron (top) or synthetic CMV-globin intron (bottom), solid lines represent minor (thin line) and major (thick line) capsid transcripts. Primers used for the recovery of the 2.8-kb capsid library amplicon are indicated at the bottom. (B) Activity of CAG, SYN, and GFAP promoters in TRACER tandem configuration (left panel) or single promoter configuration (right panel). Depicted transgenes were packaged in AAV9 capsid and tested in HEK293T cells or primary mouse brain cells (1e5 VG/cell, n = 3). RNA was quantified by real-time RT-PCR 48 h post-treatment. Values indicate RNA expression normalized to CAG vectors in each cell type (mean ± SD). ∗p < 0.05 (t test). (C) Construction of peptide display libraries. Randomized sequences preceded by AQ, DG, or DGT residues were introduced in AAV9 VP1 at the indicated positions in vectors containing SYN or GFAP promoter. (D) Overview of the in vivo selection process. (1) DNA libraries are used to produce a virus library, (2) virus libraries are injected intravenously (i.v.) into mice (1e12VG per mouse), (3) bulk RNA is recovered from whole brains 28 days post-injection, (4) capsid fragments encoding the peptide library are amplified by RT-PCR, analyzed by next-generation sequencing (NGS), and cloned into TRACER vectors for another round of selection. (E) Example of RT-PCR products obtained from three mice 28 days after injection with SYN-driven and GFAP-driven library (top and middle panel, respectively). The 3-kb band from the molecular weight marker is indicated. Bottom panel: RT-negative controls.
We performed a series of in vitro experiments to test possible interference between the P40 promoter and the non-AAV promoters placed in tandem configuration. We tested three promoters in the context of AAV9 TRACER vectors: the ubiquitous cytomegalovirus (CMV) enhancer-chicken β-actin (CAG) promoter, the neuron-specific human synapsin 1 (SYN) promoter,33 and the astrocyte-specific gfaABC1D (GFAP) promoter.34 All constructs were used t
[...truncated]