# Identification of Small-Molecule Inhibitors of Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 Signaling via In Silico Hot Spot Prediction and Molecular Docking to alpha-Klotho.

**PMID:** 35868851
**Journal:** Journal of chemical information and modeling (2022)
**Authors:** Liu SH, Xiao Z, Mishra SK et al.
**PMC:** PMC10018682
**Search context:** druggability_assessment

## Full Text


### INTRODUCTION

Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a bone-derived hormone that regulates phosphate and vitamin D homeostasis by forming a ternary complex with the FGF receptor (FGFR) and α-Klotho in renal proximal tubules.1,2 Excess FGF23 impairs phosphate reabsorption and vitamin D production, causing hereditary and acquired hypophosphatemic disorders, such as X-linked hypophosphatemic (XLH) rickets and tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO), respectively.3
In the past, treatment for XLH consisted of phosphate and vitamin D supplements, which can cause excess phosphate and vitamin D and nephrocalcinosis.4,5 TIO can often be cured by resection of the FGF23-producing tumor, but the tumor removal is only successful in ~50% of the patients.6,7 Recently, the antibody burosumab has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat XLH and TIO. Burosumab binds to and blocks FGF23 activation of the FGFR:α-Klotho complex8,9 and increases serum phosphate levels in patients with XLH without reported toxicity,10 but it has a long 16 day biological half-life.11 In addition, peptides can also be used to partially block the FGF23 C-terminal tail to significantly reduce extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity,12 one of the critical pathways for FGF23 signal transduction.13,14
Small-molecule drugs are a promising alternative to burosumab and peptides because of their potential oral availability and lower cost. We previously used high-throughput virtual screening and ensemble docking to the N-terminal domain of FGF23 [Protein Data Bank (PDB) code: 2P39]15 to identify a compound ZINC13407541 (N-[[2-(2-phenylethenyl)cyclopenten-1-yl]methylidene]hydroxylamine), which was designed to bind to FGF23 and experimentally verified to inhibit α-Klotho-dependent FGF23 signaling with a half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 0.45 ± 0.24μM.13 Further development of a series of analogues based on ZINC13407541 structure–activity relationships identified two more compounds with enhanced drug-like properties,13a [(E)-2-((E)-4-methylstyryl)benzaldehyde oxime] and 8n [(E)-2-(4-(tert-butyl)phenyl)cyclopent-1-ene-1-carbaldehyde oxime] that blocked FGF23 signaling in vitro and significantly increased serum phosphate and vitamin D concentrations in the mouse model of XLH (Hyp).16,17
Developing small-molecule drugs disrupting the FGF23:FGFR:α-Klotho complex is a promising strategy toward discovering novel inhibitors. Recently, the crystal structure of the ternary complex of FGF23:FGFR1c ectodomain:α-Klotho ectodomain 1:1:1 (PDB code: 5W21) was obtained (Figure 1),18 which shows that α-Klotho tethers the C-terminal tail of FGF23 and FGFR1c simultaneously and that α-Klotho acts as a non-enzymatic molecular scaffold for FGF23 signaling. The crystal structure provides the structural information needed for computationally exploring small molecules that disrupt the protein/protein interactions/interfaces (PPIs) to reduce FGF23 signaling.
In silico screening of virtual compound libraries is a promising way to identify effective PPI inhibitors for subsequent experimental validation.19,20 For example, pharmacophore screening followed by molecular docking has led to PPI inhibitors with micromolar binding affinity.21 A critical step for the success of this approach is to select appropriate binding sites to dock the compounds (ligands) to. Promising ligand-binding sites in this scenario would be “hot spot” residues. These residues confer a disproportionate amount of the binding energy at the PPI and may be druggable by small molecules.22 Hot spots can be predicted computationally,23–31 and here, we used the KFC2a method,30 which is based on a machine learning predictive model and recognizes structural features of PPIs.
In this study, we used the ternary crystal structure (PDB code: 5W21)18 to computationally identify the FGF23:α-Klotho interface as one with the largest fraction of hot spots and druggable ligand-binding sites on α-Klotho. We further identified Tyr433 on α-Klotho as a promising hot spot and α-Klotho as an appropriate drug-binding target at this interface.~5.5 million lead-like compounds were then docked computationally to an isolated α-Klotho crystal structure near its interface with FGF23 (see the red box in Figure 1). We identified 24 compounds with the highest protein–ligand binding affinities to α-Klotho and 20 compounds with the largest number of contacts with Tyr433. 5 of the 44 compounds were selected for in vitro assays based on their predicted ligand efficiency and vendor availability. We found that ZINC12409120 {3,4-dihydro-1H-isoquinolin-2-yl-[3-(1H-indol-4-yl)-1,2,4-oxadiazol-5-yl]methanone} disrupted FGF23:α-Klotho interaction to reduce FGF23-mediated ERK activities by 70%, and it had an IC 50 of 5.0 ± 0.23 μM. Molecular-dynamics (MD) simulations of the ZINC12409120:α-Klotho complex starting from in silico docking poses show that ZINC12409120 interacts with residues on the KL1 domain, the KL1–KL2 linker, and the KL2 domain of α-Klotho simultaneously to potentially disrupt the function of α-Klotho and deter FGF23:α-Klotho interaction. More compounds will be tested, and more functional assays of ZINC12409120 will be conducted in future studies.

### METHODS


### Hot Spot and Surface Pocket Analyses.

We used the crystal structure of the FGF23:FGFR1cecto:α-Klothoecto 1:1:1 ternary complex (PDB code: 5W21).18 The N-acetyl glucosamine residues on α-Klotho were not included since they are not at the KL1:KL2:FGF23 interface,18 whose structural flexibility is in the interest of this study. The four missing residues (Glu957-Glu960) on the C-terminal tail of α-Klotho were patched using alignment followed by an automodel class without refinement in MODELLER,32 and the missing atoms within each residue on the complex were then built using VMD.33 Protonation states were determined using the pdb2gmx command in GROMACS, where they are assigned using the pKa of isolated amino acids and pH = 7.34,35 The complex for docking was prepared using MGLTools36 (https://ccsb.scripps.edu/mgltools) to remove its non-polar hydrogen atoms. This structure was uploaded to the KFC Server30,31 (https://mitchell-web.ornl.gov/KFC_Server) and FTMap Server29 (https://ftmap.bu.edu) for predicting hot spots using the KFC2a method30 and druggable sites at the PPI, respectively. In addition, the CASTp method37 (http://sts.bioe.uic.edu/castp) was used to obtain solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) and residue information of the surface pockets using a default probe radius of 1.4 Å. A brief description of these three online servers is in the following paragraph.
The KFC2a method30,31 calculates each PPI residue’s eight features, which are mainly related to its SASA and local plasticity, and compares them with those of experimentally determined hot spots and outputs hot spot confidence scores. In the independent test set of the KFC2a method, 82% of experimentally validated hot spots have positive confidence scores, and 70% of non-hot spots have negative ones. Therefore, positive confidence scores suggest prospective hot spots. The FTMap Server29 distributes 16 small organic probe molecules, varying in size, shape, and polarity, on the protein surface, finds the most energetically favorable positions for each probe type, and then clusters the probes. The residue with the largest number of probe clusters is considered as the main druggable site. CASTp37 uses the alpha shape method38 to identify topographic features (e.g., area and volume) of proteins.

### Molecular Docking to

Docking was performed on the α-Klotho structures extracted from the ternary complex18 and from snapshots selected from MD simulations as described below. The latter approach, known as ensemble docking, takes into account the thermal fluctuations of the binding-site atoms.39

### MD Simulations for Ensemble Docking.

α-Klotho was centered in a dodecahedron box with a 15 Å padding between α-Klotho and the box
[...truncated]