# Latest Developments in "Adaptive Enrichment" Clinical Trial Designs in Oncology.

**PMID:** 39271644
**Journal:** Therapeutic innovation & regulatory science (2024)
**Authors:** Tu Y, Renfro LA
**PMC:** PMC11530510
**Search context:** adaptive_trial_design

## Full Text


### Introduction

As cancer has become better understood on the molecular level with the evolution of gene sequencing techniques, considerations for individualized therapy using predictive biomarkers (those associated with a treatment’s effect) have shifted to a new level. Traditional randomized trial designs tend to either oversimplify or overlook differences in patients’ genetic and molecular profiles, either by fully enriching eligibility to a marker subgroup or enrolling all-comers without prospective use of potentially predictive biomarkers. In the former case of marker enrichment, one cannot learn about a marker’s true predictive ability from the trial’s conduct (as marker-negative patients are excluded); in the latter case ignoring the biomarker, the end result may be a “washing out” of the treatment effect when a predictive marker truly does exist within the sampled patient population.
In the last decade or so, randomized “adaptive enrichment” clinical trials have become increasingly utilized to strike a balance between enrolling all patients with a given tumor type, versus enrolling only a subpopulation whose tumors are defined by a potential predictive biomarker related to the mechanism of action of the experimental therapy (see for example [1, 2]). On a high level, adaptive enrichment designs take the form of a clinical trial that begins by randomizing participants to a targeted versus a control therapy regardless of marker value, then adapts through a series of one or more interim analyses to potentially limit subsequent trial recruitment to a marker-defined patient subpopulation that is showing early signals of enhanced treatment benefit.
In this review article, we first discuss the “traditional” presentation of both enrichment and adaptive enrichment designs and their decision rules and describe statistical or practical challenges associated with each. Next, we introduce innovative design extensions and adaptations to adaptive enrichment designs proposed during the last few years in the clinical trial methodology literature, both from Bayesian and frequentist perspectives. Finally, we review articles in which different designs within this class are directly compared or features are examined, and we conclude with some comments on future research directions.

### Enrichment Trial Designs

To motivate discussion of adaptive enrichment designs and why they are useful, it is helpful to first understand enrichment trial designs, or designs that focus only on a subset of the patient population from the beginning.
Design Details: In the setting of targeted therapies with strong prior evidence or clinical rationale supporting efficacy only within a biomarker-selected subgroup, “marker-enriched” or enrichment trial designs are used to confirm signal or efficacy only in that selected subgroup. In these types of trials, patients are screened and classified into prespecified marker positive and negative subgroups at or prior to enrollment, with only marker positive patients eligible to remain on study and receive protocol-directed targeted therapy. This usually takes the form of a small, single-arm phase II study without a randomized comparator, but in some settings, comparisons against a randomized non-targeted standard of care therapy might be made (see Fig. 1).Figure 1.Enrichment trial Schema with a Single Arm.
Enrichment trial Schema with a Single Arm.
Example: An example of a clinical trial with an enrichment design is the Herceptin Adjuvant (HERA) trial. The HERA trial is a phase III, randomized, three-arm trial that studied the efficacy of 1 year versus 2 years of adjuvant trastuzumab versus control (no additional treatment) in women with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive early breast cancer after completion of locoregional therapy and chemotherapy [3]. HER2 is overexpressed in 15–25% of breast cancer and trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody, binds the HER2 extracellular receptor [4, 5]. The primary outcome was disease-free survival and using an intention-to-treat analysis, significant treatment benefit was demonstrated for 1 year of trastuzumab compared to the control arm.
Limitations: One important limitation of enrichment designs is that a marker’s predictive ability to select patients for treatment is assumed to already be known and cannot be validated from the trial itself. It is theoretically possible that a pre-defined marker-negative subgroup might also benefit from the targeted treatment, but that knowledge won’t be updated with an enrichment design. For example, a pre-clinical study found that trastuzumab can decrease cancer cell proliferation in HER2 negative and HER2 phosphorylation at tyrosine Y877 positive breast cancer cell lines, which is comparable to the drug effect in HER2 positive breast cancer cell lines, showing that the HER2 negative subpopulation may also benefit from trastuzumab [6]. Around the same time, however, the randomized study B-47 conducted by the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) group showed no effect of trastuzumab in HER2-low patients [7].
Another limitation of enrichment trial designs is the necessity of establishing predefined subgroups during the study planning phase, which becomes complicated when dealing with biomarkers that are measured on a continuous scale, like expression levels or laboratory values. Determining an appropriate threshold to divide patients into “positive” and “negative” groups is not always straightforward, validated, or effective in distinguishing the effect of the targeted treatment. Selecting an incorrect threshold during trial design can result in an ineffective or underpowered study, and revising the decision once the trial has begun accrual is not advisable.

### Adaptive Enrichment Trial Designs

Adaptive enrichment trial designs, on the other hand, are an attractive solution to the inherent weaknesses of a fully enriched trial design.
Design Details: An adaptive enrichment trial design initially enrolls patients with any marker value(s) and randomizes them to experimental targeted versus standard (non-targeted) therapy. As the trial progresses, accrual may be subsequently refined or restricted to patients with certain marker values according to those showing initial efficacy on the basis of one or more interim analyses. This design is randomized out of necessity, so that treatment-by-marker interactions may be computed, and adaptations based on differential treatment effects by marker subgroups can be facilitated. At the interim analyses, according to pre-specified decision rules, a trial may stop early for futility or efficacy, either overall, or within a marker-defined subgroup. If the biomarker of interest is not naturally dichotomous, the same interim analyses may also be used to select or revise marker cutpoints (see Fig. 2).Figure 2.Adaptive Enrichment Trial Schema with a Binary Biomarker.
Adaptive Enrichment Trial Schema with a Binary Biomarker.
Example: One real-world example of an adaptive enrichment design is the Morphotek Investigation in Colorectal Cancer: Research of MORAb-004 (MICRO), which is an adaptive, two-stage, phase II study assessing the effect of ontuxizumab versus placebo in patients with advanced metastatic colorectal cancer [8, 9]. Ontuxizumab, a monoclonal antibody treatment targeting endosialin function, was expected to be more effective in patients with endosialin-related biomarkers. Since the biomarkers were continuous in nature and the optimal cutoffs were unknown, the study included an assessment for determining the best cutoffs at an interim analysis, where progression-free survival (PFS) served as the primary endpoint. Initially, the goal was to demonstrate the treatment effect of ontuxizumab either overall or within subgroups defined by biomarkers. However, the interim analysis revealed that none of the biomarkers had a predictive relationship with treatment outcome. Consequently, the desi
[...truncated]