# Digital pathology and artificial intelligence in translational medicine and clinical practice.

**PMID:** 34611303
**Journal:** Modern pathology : an official journal of the United States and Canadian Academy of Pathology, Inc (2022)
**Authors:** Baxi V, Edwards R, Montalto M et al.
**PMC:** PMC8491759
**Search context:** patient_stratification

## Full Text


### Introduction

Pathology has historically played a crucial role in the drug development process, including preclinical research to facilitate target identification, define drug mechanism of action and pharmacodynamics, and enable toxicology assessments1,2. More recently, pathology has formed a bridge between drug discovery, translational, and clinical research programs that are striving to decipher disease pathophysiology in the context of the mechanism of action, patient selection, or patient stratification (Fig. 1)3,4. Such insights form the basis of novel hypotheses that can further be explored in drug discovery programs or applied to inform clinical trial design, thereby improving the probability of technical and regulatory success.Fig. 1Digital pathology: from drug discovery to clinical diagnostics.Dx diagnostic, EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor, FISH fluorescence in situ hybridization, HER2 human epidermal receptor 2, IHC immunohistochemistry, IVD in vitro diagnostic, MOA mechanism of action, NGS next-generation sequencing, PD pharmacodynamics, PD-L1 programmed death-ligand 1, TME tumor microenvironment.

### Digital pathology: from drug discovery to clinical diagnostics.

Dx diagnostic, EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor, FISH fluorescence in situ hybridization, HER2 human epidermal receptor 2, IHC immunohistochemistry, IVD in vitro diagnostic, MOA mechanism of action, NGS next-generation sequencing, PD pharmacodynamics, PD-L1 programmed death-ligand 1, TME tumor microenvironment.
Pathology-based assessments have been used to classify disease and determine efficacy in drug development across a variety of disease areas5–7. For example, during phase 2 trials for drug development in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers evidence of efficacy on a histological endpoint to support initiation of phase 3 trials7. Additionally, pathological complete response (pCR) has been studied as a surrogate endpoint in patients with cancer for the prediction of long-term clinical benefit and favorable prognosis with the administration of neoadjuvant therapy8–13. More recently, pCR was associated with improved long-term efficacy in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer treated with chemotherapy plus either intravenous or subcutaneous trastuzumab14. In the immuno-oncology (I-O) arena, immune-related pathologic response criteria have been applied retrospectively to surgical specimens from patients treated with immunotherapy in the neoadjuvant or advanced disease setting to predict survival in several tumor types15,16.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) has been used to characterize biomarkers, such as programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), and their association with clinical benefit. Traditional pathology techniques present several advantages, such as low cost, widespread availability, and application on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples17, but challenges pertaining to differences in laboratory methods and subjective interpretation, particularly with the evaluation of immune cell staining, may lead to inter-observer variability18. This can produce inconsistency in diagnoses, which may impact treatment decisions19–23. While the use of IHC assays has led to better identification of patients who respond to I-O therapy24–26, there remains a need to more accurately quantify complex immune markers, including cell phenotypes in a spatial context, that require advanced quantitative tools to maximize the amount of information yielded from individual samples27,28.
Artificial intelligence (AI) applications in pathology improve quantitative accuracy and enable the geographical contextualization of data using spatial algorithms. Adding spatial metrics to IHC can improve the clinical value of biomarker identification approaches. For example, in a recent meta-analysis, the addition of spatial context to IHC, achieved using multiplex IHC and immunofluorescence (IF), was significantly better at predicting objective response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) compared with gene expression profiling (GEP) or IHC alone28, indicating the need for more complex computational approaches to decipher the underlying biology and enhance clinical utility.
The development and integration of digital pathology and AI–based approaches provide substantive advantages over traditional methods, such as enabling spatial analysis while generating highly precise, unbiased, and consistent readouts that can be accessed remotely by pathologists29.

### Advancing from traditional pathology to digital pathology

Efforts to overcome some of the challenges seen with traditional pathology methods have led to the development and adoption of complex, novel imaging systems and whole slide image (WSI) scanners that have enabled the transition of pathology into the digital era, also known as digital pathology. Within minutes, WSI scanners capture multiple images of entire tissue sections on the slide, which are digitally stitched together to generate a WSI that can be reviewed by a pathologist on a computer monitor (Fig. 2)30,31. Two scanners, Philips IntelliSite Pathology Solution (PIPS) (Philips, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and Leica Aperio AT2 DX System (Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, Illinois, USA), are approved by the FDA for review and interpretation of digital surgical pathology slides prepared from biopsied tissue32,33.Fig. 2Digital prognostic pathology workflow.BOR best overall response, IHC immunohistochemistry, OS overall survival, PFS progression-free survival, QC quality control. aLeica Biosystems; bIndica Labs; cProscia; dPD-L1 IHC 28-8 pharmDx. Dako/Agilent Technologies.

### Digital prognostic pathology workflow.

BOR best overall response, IHC immunohistochemistry, OS overall survival, PFS progression-free survival, QC quality control. aLeica Biosystems; bIndica Labs; cProscia; dPD-L1 IHC 28-8 pharmDx. Dako/Agilent Technologies.
There are many practical advantages to using these digital pathology image systems and solutions that would bring substantial benefits to translational and clinical research. These include the organization and storage of large amounts of data in a centralized location, integration of digital workflow software to help streamline processes and improve efficiency, convenient sharing of image data to enable cross-specialty worldwide remote communication, reduced testing turnaround time, and the generation of precise and highly reproducible tissue-derived readouts reducing inter-pathologist variability29,34–37. The increased speed and efficiency gained in image acquisition can enhance the downstream utilization options of traditional techniques such as hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), IHC, and in situ hybridization. These slides can be converted into a remotely available image within minutes and centrally reviewed by multiple pathologists from various sites29, with applications including education, research, consultation, and diagnostics29.
Recently, due to ongoing disruptions in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic, including remote working and restricted travel, digital pathology has been crucial in the continuation of clinical and academic research, as well as routine pathology services38. Without the need to transport glass slides and the ensuing logistical and safety concerns, central pathology review enables secure remote working38. Additionally, the utilization of digital images allows the generation of pixel-level pattern information, leading to expanded use of computational approaches that enable a quantitative analysis of WSIs39,40.

### Improvements gained from digital pathology: quantitative analysis of the WSI

The use of digital image analysis in pathology can identify and quantify specific cell types quickly and accurately and can quantitatively evaluate histological features, morphological patterns, and biologically relevant regions of interest (e.g., t
[...truncated]