# Development of mutated beta-catenin gene signature to identify CTNNB1 mutations from whole and spatial transcriptomic data in patients with HCC.

**PMID:** 39583094
**Journal:** JHEP reports : innovation in hepatology (2024)
**Authors:** Lehrich BM, Tao J, Liu S et al.
**PMC:** PMC11582745
**Search context:** patient_stratification

## Full Text


### Introduction

Liver cancer, of which hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common, is the third leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.1 The global burden is projected to increase as the etiology shifts from viral to nonviral causes, including alcoholic liver disease and metabolic dysfunction associated steatotic liver disease.2 HCC develops in the background of these chronic liver diseases as liver injury and inflammation drive fibrosis, cirrhosis, and eventually cancer. In the advanced disease setting, overall survival (OS) is 12–18 months with current systemic therapy.3 Existing immunotherapeutic combinations with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have drastically improved the treatment armamentarium for HCC, however, objective response rates remain critically low between 30–35%.4,5 Early post-hoc analysis has indicated that both tumor genetics and tumor microenvironment features likely influence ICI response.6
One such pathway with known heterogenous ICI response rates observed in preclinical models and in patients with HCC is the Wnt/β-catenin pathway.7,8 In HCC, approximately 26–37% of patients, depending on the geographic region, harbor mutations in CTNNB1, the gene encoding β-catenin.9,10 These mutations are stabilizing, gain-of-function (GOF) mutations mostly in exon 3 of the CTNNB1 gene. In adults, β-catenin under normal physiological conditions (in the absence of Wnt ligand) is phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and degraded by the proteasomal degradation machinery. However, mutations render β-catenin unable to be phosphorylated or ubiquitinated, which leads to its stabilization and nuclear translocation to act as a transcription co-factor with TCF/LEF family members to turn on target gene expression. We and others have demonstrated a role for β-catenin in tumor cell proliferation and growth,11,12 tumor metabolism13,14 and tumor-immune interactions.8 Identifying patients with β-catenin activation thus may have direct prognostic and therapeutic implications in HCC as treatment becomes more personalized.6
As tissue and/or liquid biopsy continues to augment the diagnostic landscape for HCC, utilizing molecularly targeted therapies in combination with ICI are likely to improve response rates.15 Thus, to translate this therapeutic combination into clinical practice, animal models which recapitulate the complex molecular biology driven by specific genetic drivers, rather than random combinations of oncogenes, in an immunocompetent mouse background, are needed to improve our understanding of the cellular and molecular basis of this disease. Our lab utilizes sleeping beauty transposon/transposase and hydrodynamic tail vein injection (SB-HDTVI) to transfect mouse hepatocytes in vivo with various combinations of oncogenes to mimic human HCC subsets. Using this ‘inside-out’ model, we have determined that the introduction of β-catenin alone does not initiate tumorigenesis, but rather requires cooperation with other secondary drivers to induce tumors in mice.12 Specifically, we have previously shown that mutated-β-catenin cooperates with hMET and Nuclear-factor-like 2 (NRF2) to induce HCC, with each model representing 9-12% of human HCC subsets.12,14 Thus, further development of these models may provide novel opportunities to understand tumor biology, biomarker discovery, and test therapeutics.
In the current study, we identified approximately 14% of HCC cases that demonstrate concomitant activation of NRF2 and MET signaling. In addition, a subset of these patients had GOF mutations in CTNNB1. Based on these clinical observations, we co-expressed mutant-CTNNB1 ± mutant-NRF2 and hMET using SB-HDTVI, which induced HCC development in mice. Transcriptomic profiling of multiple tumors demonstrated similarity to the respective human HCC subsets. With the availability of a multitude of HCC mouse models with transcriptomic data, we were able to derive a common gene signature representing β-catenin activity referred henceforth as the Mutant β-catenin-specific Gene Signature (MBGS) which was verified in its ability to successfully identify CTNNB1-mutated HCC in multiple patient cohorts. Additionally, we demonstrate comparable or superior performance of MBGS to other molecular subclass gene signatures and Wnt/β-catenin gene signatures in both whole and spatial transcriptomic datasets. Tumor nodules which demonstrate high MBGS expression are immune excluded, yet may be situated within an inflamed stroma. This illustrates that β-catenin likely drives tumor immune exclusion within nodules, but other tumor extrinsic features direct immune activity within the stroma. Overall, our study has derived a transcriptomic signature with expected value in patient molecular stratification for personalized medicine in HCC as a companion diagnostic when anti-β-catenin therapies become available.

### Results


### Significant subsets of patients with HCC have overlapping NRF2 and MET gene signatures and represent a distinct molecular subgroup

We have previously identified cooperativity between β-catenin and NRF2 activation and between β-catenin and MET activation, using patient HCC samples and in mouse models with each subset representing around 9-12% of all HCCs.12,14 Here, we investigated whether NRF2 and MET co-activation cooperate in the pathogenesis of HCC, and whether this could be modeled in vivo to study liver tumor biology of such a distinct subset. First, to determine whether a subgroup of patient tumors have any overlap in NRF2 and MET activation, we extracted datasets from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) of liver hepatocellular carcinoma (LIHC) patients.10 TCGA data contained a total of 374 HCC cases including 50 cases for which adjacent normal tissues are also available. To define a population of patients that were NRF2-active (henceforth referred to as NRF2-high), we applied hierarchical clustering to the entire cohort using a previously published 28-gene NRF2 activation gene signature,16 which grouped the cases into 4 distinct clusters as we have previously described (Fig. S1a).14 The cluster identified 100 HCC cases with high expression of the 28-gene NRF2 activation gene signature, suggesting ∼27% of all HCC cases to be NRF2-high, which encompassed the majority of patients with HCC with GOF-mutations in NFE2L2 or loss of function (LOF)-mutations in KEAP1, but also captured cases with NRF2 activation independent of these mutations. Additionally, to define a population of patients which were MET-active (henceforth referred to as MET-high), we applied hierarchical clustering to the entire TCGA-LIHC cohort using the previously published KAPOSI_LIVER_CANCER_MET_UP 18-gene signature17 from mSigDB (Fig. S1b), as we have previously described using a smaller TCGA cohort.12,18 Interestingly, we observed a dichotomous sub-clustering of the 18-gene MET activation signature, where we defined a cluster representing patients with high expression of the top nine genes on the heatmap, and a cluster representing patients with expression of the bottom nine genes on the heatmap. Thus, we classified the MET-high patients as those in both clusters combined (pink and green in Fig. S1b), representing 175 patients with HCC, or ∼47% of all HCC cases. From this analysis, we also observed that many patients included in these clusters had GOF-mutations in NFE2L2 or LOF-mutations in KEAP1, suggesting potential cooperativity between NRF2 and MET (Fig. S1b). Indeed, we identified 54 patients with HCC or 14.4% of all HCC cases, which showed an overlap of NRF2-high and MET-high gene signatures in TCGA (Fig. 1a).Fig. 1Influence of Nrf2 and Met pathway activation on gene expression in HCC with and without CTNNB1-mutations.(A) Venn diagram of 374 The Cancer Genome Atlas-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) patients categorized as Nrf2-high, Met-high, or CTNNB1-mutated, and their patient overlap. Eighteen (4.8% all HCC) patients had overlap of CTNNB1-mutation, Nrf2-high, Met-
[...truncated]