# ImmunoPET imaging of Trop2 in patients with solid tumours.

**PMID:** 38565806
**Journal:** EMBO molecular medicine (2024)
**Authors:** Huang W, Zhang Y, Cao M et al.
**PMC:** PMC11099157
**Search context:** patient_stratification

## Full Text


### Problem

Diagnostic imaging methods for malignant tumours, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are currently unable to capture changes at the molecular or cellular levels. Invasive histological biopsy faces inherent limitations and detection biases due to the heterogeneous nature of the tumours. Thus, noninvasive techniques are urgently needed to visualise the heterogeneous expression of biomarkers such as trophoblast cell surface antigen 2 (Trop2), a promising oncogenic pan-cancer biomarker.

### Results

Two novel nanobody tracers (i.e., [68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T4 and [68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T5) with high binding affinity were developed to specifically target Trop2. Preclinical studies in tumour-bearing mouse models revealed these tracers’ good pharmacokinetics and diagnostic potentials. [68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T4 showed excellent pharmacokinetics in a beagle dog, which warrants translational potential. In three patients with solid tumours, [68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T4 immuno-positron emission tomography (immunoPET) noninvasively and precisely visualised negative, positive, and heterogeneous Trop2 expression in primary and metastatic tumours, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry staining.

### Impact

The two novel Trop2-targeted nanobody tracers exhibit promising diagnostic value and could allow the identification of patients who would benefit from Trop2-targeted therapies and the evaluation of post-treatment therapeutic responses.

### Introduction

The incidence and mortality rates of patients diagnosed with malignant tumours are rising each year (Siegel et al, 2023). Correspondingly, the number of treatment options available to them is also increasing. However, satisfactory outcomes are yet to be achieved with many of the available treatments. Factors such as tumour drug resistance, heterogeneity, and other factors may coordinately contribute to this outcome (Dagogo-Jack and Shaw, 2017; Gottesman, 2002). Currently, histopathology remains the primary standard for tumour diagnosis. In addition to standard first-line chemotherapeutic agents, utilising targeted therapies and immunotherapies necessitates the detection of biomarkers expressed via immunohistochemistry (IHC) and other detection methods (Saeed et al, 2023). Nonetheless, high biomarker expression does not guarantee treatment success in all patients, while negative biomarker expression has proven effective in some cases (Balar et al, 2017; Daud et al, 2016). All tests that require a biopsy are subject to errors and limitations caused by various factors, such as the deep anatomical location and the spatiotemporal heterogeneity of the tumour, leading to difficulties in invasive tissue collection and inaccurate evaluation of the heterogeneous tumours (Chen et al, 2016; Hegde et al, 2016; Van Allen et al, 2015).
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is increasingly essential for tumour diagnosis and efficacy assessment. Immuno-positron emission tomography (immunoPET) is a revolutionary molecular imaging technique that combines the target specificity of antibodies with the inherent sensitivity of PET technology (Ametamey et al, 2008; Rowe and Pomper, 2021). ImmunoPET imaging can provide valuable information on biomarker status throughout the body and treatment response during the treatments (Wei et al, 2020). For instance, Bensch et al employed 89Zr-labelled atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1 antibody) to predict the potential response to PD-L1 blockade. The study demonstrated that pre-treatment PET signalling, but not the predictive biomarkers from IHC or ribonucleic acid sequencing, predicted the patients’ clinical response following PD-L1-targeted immunotherapy (Bensch et al, 2018). Results from a clinical study in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-targeted therapy indicated that HER2-directed 89Zr-trastuzumab immunoPET imaging could predict treatment response noninvasively within weeks of treatment initiation. Additionally, early increased uptake of 89Zr-trastuzumab may identify drug-resistant disease sites before conventional computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging detects disease progression (Sanchez-Vega et al, 2019). Therefore, the information provided by immunoPET is valuable for optimising the management of human malignancies by noninvasively visualising target dynamics before and after the prescription of molecularly targeted or immunotherapy agents.
Trop2, also known as trophoblast cell surface antigen 2, is a tumour-associated calcium signal transducer (TACSTD) gene family member. The Trop2 gene encodes a transmembrane protein with a single structural domain, ~36 kDa, consisting of 323 amino acids. It contains four potential N-terminal glycosylation sites (Stein et al, 2006). In recent years, accumulating research has shown that Trop2 functions as an unfavourable prognostic biomarker for multiple tumours (Dum et al, 2022). It exhibits high expression in various types of solid tumours such as breast (Zhao et al, 2018), thyroid (Guan et al, 2017), and oral squamous cell carcinomas (Tang et al, 2019) in comparison to other tumour biomarkers. Increased level of Trop2 expression is significantly linked to reduced survival time and unfavourable prognosis (Liu et al, 2022). Studies have shown that abnormal expression of Trop2 in different cultured cancer cells stimulates cell proliferation. Moreover, animal experiments indicate that tumour cells exhibiting high Trop2 expression are generally more tumorigenic. Conversely, treating cells with anti-Trop2 antibodies can prevent tumour growth (Herlyn et al, 1984). In addition to regulating tumour growth, the high expression of Trop2 is closely associated with increased tumour metastasis, as seen in pancreatic (Cubas et al, 2010) and lung cancers (Li et al, 2016). Trop2 facilitates tumour development by mediating multiple signalling pathways and promoting tumour cell growth, proliferation, and metastasis (Lipinski et al, 1981).
Based on the pan-cancer expression of Trop2, it is currently utilised as a target for antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs) in third-line treatment of triple-negative breast cancer, with several ongoing clinical trials exploring the safety profiles and efficacy of novel Trop2-targeted therapies (Bardia et al, 2021a). Nevertheless, effective identification of patients likely to benefit from these treatments remains elusive. It could be advantageous to enhance patients’ outcomes and decrease treatment expenses by using the immunoPET imaging technique to noninvasively identify patients with heterogeneous Trop2 expression before treatment with Trop2-targeted ADCs, thereby allowing patient stratification and efficacy prediction. Based on our previous studies (An et al, 2022; Huang et al, 2024; Zhang et al, 2023), this work aimed to develop and characterise novel nanobody-derived immunoPET imaging tracers specific for human Trop2. Following thorough preclinical studies in tumour-bearing mouse models and a healthy beagle dog, a pilot clinical imaging study was carried out to explore the safety profiles and diagnostic value of one of the tracers ([68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T4) in patients with solid tumours. Moreover, head-to-head diagnostic differences of [68Ga]Ga-NOTA-T4 and [18F]-FDG (a tracer reflecting glucose metabolism) were compared in these patients.

### Results


### Characteristics of nanobodies (T4 and T5) and its derivative (ABDT4)

We developed two monovalent nanobodies, i.e., T4 (Fig. 1A−C) and T5 (Fig. 1D−F). The molecular weight of T4 or T5 was almost 15 kDa, as tested by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE; Fig. 1A,D). They both possessed more than 95% purity, verified by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Fig. 1B,E). In addition, the KD value of T4 and T5 with human Trop2 was 615.8 picomole (pM) and 708.2 pM, respectively (Fig. 1C,F). Binding affinities of T4 and T5 with recombination human Trop2 were robust and stable, a prerequisite for d
[...truncated]